Me --> Critical
1. It doesn't have a methodology. It says it does IMP, but that only means that it identifies families of theory that disclose certain ontologies, which is fine for each one, but it leaves them in parts - good knowledge in 8 parts, tells us that they are always there, but doesn't say anything about how to get from the parts to the whole.
	1. Quads are conceptual signifiers, and although they point to ontological domains, they are not ontological distinctions. You can't mistake the symbolic representation of an ontological reality with the reality itself. Quads and [zones](Zones.md) orient attention to ontologies and alert us to appropriate possible methodologies, but they aren't any more true of the realities towards which they point than a signpost is true of the city towards which it points. Quads are symbols that point to important different aspects of a single thing, not separate parts of it. 
	2. In AQAL, ontologies aren't separate, they are different modes of knowing a given thing, the thing itself isn't knowable (by us) all at once. In any emergent, relative system, complete knowledge isn't possible. What is available for knowledge is limited by the perspective seen, the method used, the LoA being used and the make up of the thing doing the seeing.
2. It's not accurate enough to depict AQAL as the 4 quads only. It needs to be a 2 entity, 6 quad model. Also, I think there are 12 methodological classes, not 8. Hermeneutics doesn't apply to the inside of a person, it applies to the inside of a culture. 
3. There seems to be a common and subtle mistake in the interpretation and application of the four quadrant model. Things like [fighter jets](The%20Religion%20of%20Tomorrow.md#^ref-51695) don't appear in the lower right hand quadrant of the individual, because they are not contained within the boundaries of that individual. That might be the observing quadrivia but it isn't the ontological domain of the fighter jet. If you want to claim that the universe is made up of holons and that each holon is comprised of at least four quadrants plus the other dimensions, then there is no way that you can locate, ontologically speaking, a fighter jet inside the individual human holon. You can locate its appearance in awareness within the human holon, and that will have something to do with the lower right quadrant but it's actual existence is within the systemic collective in the CR.
4. The idea that holons are the most fundamental thing in the universe might also be problematic because even though Ken claims this, he also claims that each Holon has four fundamental drives. Based on the rule of hierarchical inclusion, if you destroy all holons, do you still have the drives? In this case do the drives pre-exist holons? This might be a case of infinite regression and goes beyond the pragmatic application of the principles we are trying to define.
5. [Integral Spirituality](Integral%20Spirituality.md) 

Me--> Defence
1. No system can ever be perfect or complete. However, every system will have some truth and positive contribution to make, almost irrespective of how imperfect and incomplete it is, even if the positive contributions arrive as a result of other factors that are elicited because of the presence of this limited thing. The question then is "how useful is any given system?". If there is some utility in a system and it necessarily has limitations or shortcomings, are we to reject the entire system because it has shortcomings? We need to get past the ad hominem approach to perception in general and perhaps critique in particular. The conflation and association of AQAL theory with Ken Wilber, thus personalising it, is a grave error. Not just in this case but in every case. If a complete and comprehensive cure for cancer was discovered by the Nazis in the concentration camps of the Second World War, would modern science and cancer sufferers world-over reject such a discovery because it was discovered by bad people? We need to be sophisticated enough to differentiate between what is beneficial and what is not and to resist the temptation to conflate those things with their originators or contexts. If we were to accept the premise that we could reject any system if it could be critiqued, and because of the incompleteness of all knowledge and the imperfection of all things, we would have no systems at all because all would be rejected. Falsification of one aspect of a system doesn't invalidate the entire system, and systems like everything else in the world, are also not meant to be complete static eternal varieties, they are also evolving as the world that they attempt to describe evolves. This is another issue or consequence of our impulse for permanent and final truth. If we are going to attempt if we are going to criticise something, the intention behind that critique, if it is merely a deconstructive or destructive attempt, has no utility. Everything that exists, already is bounded, It is limited, it is not final, it is evolving, its truth today will be different from its truth tomorrow, and its truth tomorrow is not obvious or visible as truth today. Destruction for destruction sake has no positive consequence if destruction or deconstruction needs to take place, it needs to do so in the service of a good that is greater than the thing being deconstructed and the attempt to deconstruct it. If I was going to integrate if I was going to critique AQAL and in doing so my goal is merely to deconstruct and discredit it, then I missed the point and the purpose that AQAL is trying to serve. If however, I critique equal in light of its own stated mission which is to integrate and be more inclusive, then the result of my critique should point out ways that more of this goal is possible even if it must be accomplished via another path. Critique needs to be intentionally constructive in its ends even if it is destructive in its means. Good critique is of this kind, because it's success results in progress overall. Success is not defined in terms of overall progress, not the elimination of an opposing or competitive point of view. Add this to the #lit_review in the justification for the use of AQAL and other things. The consequence of science of any kind that isn't based on values higher than those that the science can deliver, but towards which it tends, is not productive. The unifying things we're looking for need to be able to contain or otherwise handle diversity like we have never seen before, perhaps in scale if not in scope, so anything that becomes feudal is going to get us nowhere, except into war.
2. Many critiques of AQAL are predictable by AQAL. There are some positions that will reject AQAL for reasons that AQAL can describe. The test of a criticism should also be viewed in reverse. If one position says something about another, then what does the reverse look like? If an egalitarian view criticises the developmental aspect for example, it is likely that that critique comes from a level of development that does not recognise that there are levels of development, especially those that supersede it. This doesn't make the theory wrong it just means that for now it's out of reach. Reversing the analysis, integral would look at such a position and understand completely why that judgement was arrived at and can accommodate it the reverse however cannot be said, from the egalitarian point of view there is a rejection of AQAL. AQAL can contain egalitarianism but egalitarianism cannot contain AQAL this doesn't make them incompatible or irreconcilable, it just means that one is over the head of the other, and therefore out of view.
3. Many more critiques of AQAL result from poor understanding of the system itself. So many times, I have read critiques that criticise something that is the result of a wrong understanding. 

Me--> Clarifications of AQAL
There are a lot of things in AQAL theory that need to be understood clearly and so clarification is frequently needed, my own clarifications specifically for the use in the PHD are also included here.

1. In AQAL proper, I think Wilbur's work is more adequately considered to be meta-conceptual than it is to be considered meta-theoretical. Conceptually speaking, his model isn't easy to contest, it would be incredibly difficult to deny the basic claims of AQAL theory. But this doesn't make it theoretical in any formal sense for example there isn't a methodological the methodological aspect is not well developed. It could be theorised that the four quadrants are not actually present in any harmonic or human experience this kind of thing would be subjectable to disprovability, and it is a theoretical claim that those four perspectives inhere within every individual, however it's not theoretical in the sense that it informs in any obvious sense or rigorous sense practise in the world. It can, and does, but it's left to the individual to work out how.


Me --> Departures from AQAL ^431994
1. Getting past the 4 quad model limitations of normal AQAL presentation. Clarification of zones. Addition of dialectic as the process of integration, communication etc between all variables.
2. Adding an explicit take in the methodology space, with a discussion about its possible phase nature. What I propose is definitely intermediate in that it will be surpassed, but that might be taken up in a wider process of emergence in which coaching in particular and the meta kind of thinking we are about here is that there is a dialogue, this phase is characterised by the dialogue of already existing theories and things, that dialogue doesn't have to remain the best we can do, and might lead to something that is better considered an integrated theory of everything.
3. Once we have existence, given the two primary poles between which all things are considered to emerge #brute_fact, then what you have is the emergence of individual things - whatever those things are, whence they come or how they come about, is not considered here. Invoking the pragmatic razor, I suggest that these things seem to be going on and we have defensible reasons to believe that they have been going on either since always, or at least in some way that is far away enough from us that we can ignore. Whatever is, has, in principle the ability within itself to be involved with other things that are, and so, relations are born, as are the concepts of identity and community at all LoA. #brute_fact Nothing exists (spatiotemporally) that does does not have another thing with which it is in relationship. 
4. Separate [Eros & Agape](Eros%20&%20Agape.md) to include Syntropy and Entropy as the first process and the first dialectic.
5. The perhaps added emphasis on the collective intelligence of cultures and systems and how they can behave in ways that look like an individual thing, without being an individual thing per se. One culture can have habits that will reject a particular moral conclusion, even if there are individual exceptions, the dominant discourse, or habit of that collective at that time, is what responds as if as one. It means something to speak about “American culture” or "Polynesian culture" etc. Whatever it means, it is conceptually and practically useful at certain levels of analysis but not at all. One cannot bring a particular culture to court, nor can one say exhaustively where a particular culture exists, nor can a culture act as if it was an individual holon. It doesn't have agency in the same way. Culture is more resilient than an individuals are and outlives them, it's the moving average of the collective interiors + emergence in a given place and time. If my group behaves a set of simple rules the collective expression of those behaviours will have some emergent properties which is not reducible to the collection of individuals. Murmurations and swarming are some emergent behavioural patterns based on simple rules executed as a collective from nature. Culture likewise can be usefully seen as the emergence of group behaviour from the intentional. 


___

AQAL emphasises a perspectival or dimensional ontology - each holon has 4 possible perspectives, perhaps 6, if we add those in which it is embedded. That is a 4-Q individual within and outside of a 2Q collective. 

Quads - describe the aspects present at any given moment - individual and collective. Individual quads insist on the compositional dimensions for any real thing the collective quads insist that every individual at once exists within and is part of and to some extent separate from the collective aspect that surrounds it. Identity of the individual can then talk about the bit that's separate, in terms of the collective against which it can be identified as unique.

The divide between the interior and the exterior can be called the sensory barrier. Matter does not sense itself - sensation is not material per se - it adds to material a quality of sense. Including thought. The capacities on the left are sensory capacities, sensitivities associated with material arrangements on the right. What is held in those sensory capacities is memory, culture etc. it's the sensible correlate to material arrangement. If my brain is arranged in such and such a manner, then my sensation of those arrangements is thus, or can appear within a range thus. Thought is proto conscious - it is meta to material, can influence it, and is sensible of it, including it's own willful productions. Meta thought is still thought and is therefore also proto conscious, it is aware of relational (of various kinds - complementing, cooperating, competing, conflicting) ordinal thoughts and is the production of subordinal thought structures which give rise to it. In this way, thought can be sensible of thought, but that still does not make it conscious.  Of course, consciousness is conscious of it all and consciousness accumulates, like gravity, on it's own the weakest of the forces, perhaps does with the congregation of matter, until, through its accumulation becomes the most powerful force there is. So where there is a kind of complex accumulation of matter, consciousness of a corresponding kind accumulates in that arrangement. That is the self-consciousness available to some extent to the witness. What consciousness is capable of doing, however, is to become conscious of itself, it can go within. So instead of being ultimately conscious of all form, it becomes aware of the not-two-ness of itself and all form. That is the beginning of God.

Levels - talks about the variety of developed complexity involved in the quads in general terms - both individual and collective.

Lines - talks about the specific profile of developed capacities and emphases in an individual - both individual and collective

States - talks about how all of the aforementioned are capable of different modes of experience

Types - talks about a particular kind of characteristic idiosyncrasy, like personality type or gender type. 

AQAL isn't a process theory and while it presupposes time, it doesn't feature time as a perspective. It could be criticised as a static ontology, and I suppose that could be defensible, but it's not supposed to be a process model, or maybe it's not it's strength

AQAL is descriptive and correlative model, not a theory per-se. It's a meta-model and a meta-theory and should be informative to any theory that chooses to look at it.




# Links


# Tags
#integral #AQAL #critique 

# Refs
## Critiques
[(Brys, 2013)](zotero://select/library/items/TNFXU6Z4) this critique is easy to discredit, see notes in the PDF




## Defences
