# #Dimension - #good-evil
Humans can do any number of good or evil things. There are coordinating things that mediate and moderate these things in the person - morals, values and whatnot, and environmental, laws, ecology tech and so on. However, the point is that we all have the spectrum within us as a feature of our nature - it's a human #universal. Being able to 

1) See this shit and decide using some kind of organising framework, including an overarching set of #axi that will serve as #magnetic_north. Those decisions come from somewhere - they are generated by an underlying structure. It might be called "values" or "beliefs" or something like that and maybe those values are also a human #universal, something that has been around for thousands of years, expressed in myths and legends etc, bound up in our cultural narratives
2) Take what appears in the context in which it is being expressed or employed - that is to say that in a given context, it is contra (or positive to) those goals to have these kinds of behaviours displayed. So for e.g. if you as a person have these underlying structures that generate your behaviour on the sports field, are they the same as those at home, or in church?
3) Not all developed positions are "good". Cancer might be highly developed, sophisticated thing, but it is bad, because it violates the axiom that life is better than death, and here, life is not the life of the cancer, it is the life of the human or other humanly desirable creature. Cancer might be "good" if we could use it to eradicate a plague of locusts for example.
4) Goodness is imparted (in part?) by a thing's context. e.g. above, cancer is good if it serves a human-valued aim
5) Is context a missing AQAL element? Like, to operationalise AQAL, do we need to have a context to help us? e.g. the ultimate value is "goodness" for the greatest depth at the greatest span - is that also contextual? Maybe magnetic north as above is also set by the context. Or is there a magnetic north that is the same across all contexts?

# Tags
#incomplete_thoughts - people inhabit two worlds at any moment and in any context - maybe the "many worlds theory of human nature" where we not only inhabit a subjective universe in which some things can be expressed freely in a context, like a culture or in a system etc. Maybe this is another dimension - #partiality #dimensions


# Links


# Refs
