Notes on what it is, how its real and how it's most practical in controlled environments.

2024-06-02
Determinism might be a perspectival thing. What I mean is that from the point of view of a higher-order evolved entity such as a human being, the behaviour of a simpler element of reality, like an atom or a subatomic particle can appear deterministic to us because it's possible that we can map out and formalise all of its properties and possible degrees of freedom, or at least those that are available to us. In this sense it is determined because there's nothing that it can do that we can't anticipate given that we know the conditions that surround it, its own properties its trajectory and so on. But even the determinism of a simple element varies with parameters that are not its own and are set in other places. For example, its context - things like temperature, nearby particles or forces with which it's interacting, gravity, or whatever else is going on. All of those things have some bearing on what the adjacent possible looks like for the particular element we are considering. But the more complex something becomes the more difficult it is to fully map and formalise its properties and every possibility in its degrees of freedom, or what exists in its adjacent possible. The number of possibilities at higher orders of complexity becomes unmanageable from a deterministic point of view, and the fact that the simplest things in the cosmos can be determined doesn't automatically imply that they are fully determined or that their determinism translates to an obvious determinism at every other level. This doesn't mean that determinism is completely true (I mean categorically and finally true as in complete and never can be added to) and the idea that the universe is not deterministic is a consequence of incomplete modelling or poor computational powers and so on - LaPlace's demon for example, it isn't possible to know everything and even if it was, the element of complexity that's visible from the outside doesn't mean that there isn't an undecidability and indeterminacy was something that is a prototype of a much later free will.

The world and everything in it might be #deterministic in principle, but to use #determinism as a life philosophy is not practical. Even if the world is deterministic in principle, life is not lived in principle, it is lived in practice. The truth of determinism then isn't so much about its provability, its more about its practicality. There is exactly nothing you can do about the infinitesimals of brain states, or body states from one moment to the next.
Determinism carries the promise of control, certainty - if this, then that - every time, everywhere. But it's not like that. You can't reconcile completely a deterministic worldview with one that is also probabilistic . There is incompleteness and uncertainty built into everything. All perception, knowledge, mathematics... all of it - is incomplete, uncertain. I also think there are some illusions that come with the idea of determinism that subtly influence the way we see things. Like if I can study a particular phenomenon, say the way things fall in a vacuum - then I can say some definite things about future occasions when something falls in a vacuum. That's great and it seems like its a solution for some things, like space travel or what else is involved when we look at the appearance of how things fall on Earth, and the way that it seems to describe law, when a deeper appreciation of a combination of laws described the way that things fall on Earth compared to the way that they fall in space. You have G, in space and on Earth, but what you don't have in space is an atmospheric context within which the thing falls, and so G (which is precise when isolated) + the dynamic system of an atmosphere, which varies in density, pressure, temperature, currents, composition and so forth, all must be factored into the calculus for falling objects on earth, which means that the in-principle precision of G has very little to do with how a baseball player catches a ball. It could be argued that every aspect of the dynamics of a falling object could in principle be modelled and therefore is deterministic. But think this though. What would you need in order to know everything that would be required to make that in-principle claim? If you wanted to know how a paper cup would fall if dropped right now from a meter above the ground on a beach in Durban, you'd need to know a very large number of things. You'd need to know everything about the atmospheric conditions at the location and how they would unfold over the time it would take for the cup to drop, bearing in mind that their presence will influence the thing that would need to be known, and any and all changes would need to be known so that if, under the exact same conditions, the cup was dropped, the same outcome would occur. That is in principle knowable, everything that is, is lawful, and if you know the laws, you should be able to apply them. The specific force of G would need to be known, along with a complete knowledge of the entire relevant contextual circumstance around the measurement. If the cup were dropped twice one second apart, it would not land in the same place, not because the laws are different, but because the continuous, dynamic, processual nature of those laws being lawful will change the outcome. If you were required to predict the outcome of the same action a week from now, the modelling needed, especially of the context, would extend to the entire globe and beyond. It's might be possible, but it's so complex that there isn't a way for it to be practical, and it would be impossible to live life on this basis. You'd die of starvation if you enacted your life only on the certainty needed by the deterministic view. That doesn't mean determinism isn't true or useful. Determinism is concerned with the study of law and it is highly informative of how we know ourselves and the world around us, which influences how we can be in it. So we do not reject determinism, but we remove from it the burden of ultimate truth. Determinism is ultimately true in only two cases - either when there is ultimate knowledge of the entire cosmos, or ultimate control of a subset of that cosmos. Otherwise, for pragmatic purposes, it is a valuable approximation.

Determinism is incomplete - doesn't account for emergence or novelty, doesn't account for evolution or probability.
Determinism increases in truth value with the increase in completeness of knowledge and / or the completeness of control (boundaries and content). Where there is low completeness of information, or control, determinism isn't the way you want to go.

D=f(k.c) as k & c tend towards ultimate, D tends towards truth. Complete knowledge is easier to achieve the more bounded and controlled a context is and its accuracy is confined to historical phenomena. If something is known, it must have been and must have been studied so that it could become known. If something is novel, then it is not known, unknowable and therefore determinism at t$_0$ is insufficient for t$_1$. Novelty is something unprecedented that emerges from the known in an unknown way. Emergence is knowable if it has historical precedent - Consider a time before the first water molecule was formed. Assume that hydrogen and oxygen both exist along with their necessary antecedents. The properties of water are neither contained in, nor suggested by, the properties of hydrogen or oxygen. In fact water as such is not knowable in advance, based solely on its constituents. Now if hydrogen and oxygen react, water results as an emergent phenomenon of that combination and exhibit's characteristics that are neither present in hydrogen nor oxygen independently or in aggregate. Something new has come into being through the combination of other known things - that is emergence. Emergence, once established, can be repeated and its laws determined once it has been once it has been established in nature. The first appearance of water was novel emergence in that it was unprecedented in the Cosmos and then having found its ability to exist and persist the laws describing its existence and persistence can be studied. As always, context is important. That is not to say that they are divorced from each other. Depending on the context, similarities are observed. For example, cool hydrogen to -253$^o$ C at one Earth atmosphere of pressure and it can be studied as a liquid. H$_2$O can be studied as a gas.

 
# Links


# Tags
#critique #determinism #emergence #novelty 

# Refs