# Diagnose
*This is a phase of analysis aimed at understanding what a given thing is (its' 0 or #ordinal value) with the purpose of exploring it, making it available to awareness and expanding what is known about it.*

Diagnosis happens whenever something is encountered and knowledge about the thing is needed. 

Diagnosis applies to as-is, to-be, the issue itself and the delta that describes the direction, magnitude and type of change that would most profitably help in the change effort.

When diagnosing, the things we are looking at is / are the ordinal holon(s) which is taken to be the problem. That is, what is the outside boundary of the problem that we're looking at? Ordinal holon can then be broken down into it's constituent parts, which are other holons, and those tested for the presence of the issue, or a contribution in some way to it, contributing connections to other holons. And so on until the composition of the presenting issue and, its context and the dynamics involved are understood. This is the logic of the issue as understood in terms of its fully composite nature.

## As-Is Diagnosis 
The client at an appropriate level of detail. This could include developmental #CoG, their action logics, any of the #AQAL dimensions - #quadrants #lines #levels #states #types #shadow and can include #context info such as key relationships, processes and so on. 

I'm wondering if I need to include a section on the relationship between the ordinal and the holon.The kinds of questions would be - what is this thing a part of, and what is a part of this thing? The second set of questions would be what is related to this thing. The combination of those things should give us an idea of what's contained in what (what's whole and what's part) and what is related to what in the entire system. If we map this out, we might end up with a network diagram of the items comprising the issue at stake, the networks connecting them together, and the significance, meaning and characteristics involved with those linkages.

### The person
One of the things that this should give us is an understanding of the centre of gravity of the individual we're talking to. It should also start to speak about any of the relevant dynamics with regard to the issue at hand. It should describe their preferences and typologies if that is important. Something about their integral psychograph would be useful as well. An overview of their waking states and how those are at play normally and when in context of the issue.
### The problem
Talk about the problem in all of its dimensions. Speak about it in third person. Objective facts. Understand how these are related to by the individual we are coaching. Understand what other people processes and organisational structures, cultural settings, etc are involved.
Why is this thing a problem?
Is this my problem to solve? How much is mine? If not all, then what are the critical things that are needed, need to be removed, or could torpedo the effort?
Does it need to be solved?
Can it be solved / grown out of etc?
### How these two things differ and how they relate
Why is this problem a problem? How does the individual relate to this problem? What does the individual have to gain by dealing with this problem or transforming it into something else? What does the individual lose by transforming or negating this problem? What are the foreseeable outcomes in the event of either of these cases?
### The context - the systems and the people
What is outside of the problem, relevant to it, but not directly part of it? Who else is involved in the generation, maintenance and sustaining of this problem? Who shares the problem? What organisational will structural political elements are involved with the problem?
### How those two things differ and relate
Is the problem something that can be handled by the individual, or are other people involved and what structural and cultural elements need to be looked at as well?
### How the person and the context differ and relate.
Does the context support the person and the problem? Does the context support the person in solving this problem? And if it was solved, would the context accept that? Is this something that the individual is actually capable of?

## Other Considerations
#Ontogeny  
What is the #chronology of the situation could also be a factor, although I don't know what the conditions indicating this might be. Perhaps looking at positive psych and pd for some clues.
We might ask - "what else do we need to know about this thing?" for example, "How did this thing come about?", "Is there benefit in considering, inquiring into the origin and history of this issue?"
#Timing
Is this the right time to solve this problem?



When is it appropriate to go into time negative to find a point of change, when is it appropriate to change now or in the future.
When these things are known, then we could ask - "Is it time for this change to happen, or does something else have to happen first?" Explore this with the client and see if there are other presenting issues or contextual things that need to be considered like competing commitments or the other stuff from Kegan as well as the inhibitor / catalyst things in experimental psychology.






# Tags
#process #analysis #holon #mediators

# Links
[[aims-20200212121906|aims-]] aims-20200212121906
[[Ontogeny Phylogeny-20200519102046|Ontogeny Phylogeny-]]  Ontogeny Phylogeny- deals with how I am handling levels of analysis and their application in the coaching process
[[Assessment - 20200901174142]]

# Refs
@wilberSexEcologySpirituality2001 @robertkeganImmunityChangeHow2009 @demattosSemioticRegulationInhibitor2013

[@gersonPlotinusEnneads2017] 
 
 
 