# The Dialogical Self
Do we always talk to ourselves? If so, then the dialogical self isn't developmental, although it might be the point where the community of self can be integrated in a better way as the first relative / systemic and integrated view of the self.
Probably 3.5 = 4.x the recognition of the community that is the self, the voices, the personas and so on.

As with the dialogue within, there is a dialogue without - that is with self and with other - LH Quads

I'm wondering if the interior dialogue of the person has parallels in their exterior dialogues. So if we were to examine the interior dialogues, personalities, roles etc. within a person and compare them to the exterior dialogues with similar personalities, roles etc.  Would there be similarities? and vice versa, if you were to look on the outside, what would we be able to say about the inside?

In a similar way if we were to consider the idea of dialectic, which uses dialogue as a process for the purposes of change in the direction of  increasing truth, what forms of dialectic that we might be more readily able to see between ourselves and other people could we apply to our inner community, its harmony, functioning and so on. 

Question first, to understand the position of the speaker and the world that they see, their hopes and fears and all the rest of it, then once their phenomenology is visible to you, set about a dialectic.

This is the same process as the 1,2,3 of god and the cure for shadow. Dialogue for understanding, in all directions, agreement, or at least the visibility of each to the other and then a dialectic either in a stated direction or context, or towards some unbidden emergent thing.

What's the difference between dialogue and dialectic?
Dialogue

# Tags
#dialectic #dialogue #self #other #developmental 

# Links
[Querying - 20201112135202](Querying%20-%2020201112135202.md)

# Refs