Was thinking earlier today is the great chain is the most real thing, like perception, through structure is conditional to the registration of that ontology to the perceptions. Less whole conceptions are able to register less of the world than more whole ones. But what if its not a great chain and it's just a bunch of dimensions that any occasion has? Like an atom has a body, mind, soul and spirit dimension, even if they are not expressed in a way that would make sense to the way we use those terms.
Maybe, for example, mind is something we call "mind" because at that level of evolution it is the most evident thing, giving the appearance of emerging at that time, but actually being more of an accumulation of sub-holons that each contribute a mind dimension such that it becomes evident at that level. That might be panpsychism - Ken doesn't like panpsychism.
Ken says that depth is synonymous with consciousness, but mind is not, because he does not subscribe to panpsyhcism as this confers mind where there is only depth (relation(ship)). So these two are different. I need to discover how they are.

It seems to me that matter only goes so far, it goes say to me, as a human as its last holon. Sure, I might, through procreation give birth to another, more sophisticated one than myself, and thus matter will have reached a greater depth of holon than the one I was, but neither I, nor my spawn are a part of a larger whole that is not social. As far as individual holons go, I and a lizard are final productions, there is nothing more to us than that. Notwithstanding the fact that we are inextricably parts of social holons, we are not of social holons the same way we are of ourselves.