# Notes
1. Dialogic and expert self as modern and postmodern [competent vs dialogic](The%20self%20of%20the%20coach_%20Conceptualization,%20issues,%20and%20opportunities%20for%20practitioner%20development..md#^03b552)

# Background
This thesis began with a personal dissatisfaction of how disorganised coaching appeared to be, when viewed as a whole. What seemed problematic to me at the time, was not so much the scale of the diversity, consequent plurality or inherent complexity of coaching, but that what was present in that diversity and complexity, was also fragmented. By "fragmented", I mean that the totality of coaching seemed to contain a great many things, objects and systems, that while individually coherent and valid on their own terms, in many cases were not widely commensurable with all the other things that populated coaching. 
The parts themselves - from the most basic, like the GROW model, to vastly more complex, like complex responsive systems theories - can each stake some claim to legitimacy, truth or efficacy based on their capabilities. Some things (such as the GROW model) are relatively inert and can be ported to guide coaching across a range of systems, genres and contexts without ill effect because they don't stake many controversial claims that other systems would reject. Others are more reactive - ontological coaching for example, is a much more extensive system based on a list of specific principles that would run into conflict more quickly with others - solution-focussed or behavioural approaches perhaps. 

Coaching itself, as a container of all of this difference, does not have a general framework with which to introduce consistency across boundaries, or reveal an inner wholeness by which the various fragments could become coherent. In the absence of such a general organising principle, the field of coaching, as rich and diverse as it is, remains populated by visible, well-understood islands of meaning that are to some degree, separated, competitive, or contradictory. With this being the status, pluralism is a kind of default position in which difference or even divergence is permitted and even celebrated. There is a definite positive to the plurality - it gives coaching an incredible richness, flexibility and depth of possibility, but the downside is that it is completely incapable of offering solutions or even suggestions about how to resolve some of the most severe challenges that coaching faces. 

These issues are easiest to see at the level of the discipline. It is easy to say that coaching, at that level, that coaching is pre-paradigmatic, atheoretical, lacks a cohesive knowledge base, still needs to gather a lot more evidence - basically formalise itself. At the practitioner or specialist level, however, these same criticisms are more difficult to defend

Pluralism, in my view, is an incredible developmental achievement, but it is hopeless as a standard. With coaching as important to the world as it has become, it is arguably unethical to settle for the status quo - we must go further, and do so without losing what pluralism has given us. 
In fact, deep organisation is widely present and commonplace in coaching - but it is always localised. The problem I saw was therefore that the localised organisation already present, did not readily seem to have a way to generalise itself across the discipline as a whole.

Without a way of coordinating the dis-integrated parts or bringing them into relationality, coaching is faced with a source of difficulty in its own internal organisation, development, theory, practice, research, teaching and is consequently subject to a number criticisms. How to address the issues is challenging not only due to the apparent difficulty in returning disparity to rapprochement, but, should such a thing be possible in the first place, why someone hadn't figured out how to do it by now, and if it was possible, what approach would be needed. If an approach could be found then the second challenge - that of the enormous scale of the problem would need to be confronted.  

Theoretical proliferation, one aspect of the complexity just mentioned, was a model problem I used in my PhD proposal to illustrate the larger problem of fragmentation and localisation. For example, if a human being is a complete, unified being, how can it be that there are 500+ theories and approaches, each with some level of efficacy, that claim to describe how his mind works, many of which can't be true at the same time? It is not obvious what the problem is, or where it lies, but there does seem to be a problem. This lead me to suppose that exploring a possible "underlying nature" might be one way to find other ways to introduce more coherence to an otherwise theoretically diverse and frequently incommensurable field.


# Introduction
>note: Key terms are discussed after the introduction, or you can refer to the glossary for clarification on any term if needed

This analysis addresses a broad scope, it considers the discipline of coaching as a multidimensional, complex wholeness that ranges over, and embraces, an extraordinarily wide and diverse terrain of philosophy, science, knowledge and practice. This includes everything from fundamental questions such as what it means to exist, to be human, to know and to value, to practicalities such as what it means to coach and the theory and knowledge coaches avail themselves of in doing so, etc. The scope covered in this view includes coaching's own internal knowledge, theory, technology etc., as well as a range of specific, external influences, knowledge etc. that are imported, interpreted or adapted for use in coaching, such as psychotherapy, counselling, adult learning, neuroscience and sociology. Each of these external domains can similarly be considered - as a multidimensional wholeness in its own right, ranging over its own internal diversity and variety. 
The scope extends further still, to include a wide variety of more general influences that pervade the world at large, such as worldviews, economics, politics, culture, social movements and ecology, among others. Finally, the full range of coaching applications is also included, such as the various genres, contexts and specialisms to which coaching can be adapted and applied. 
Every element and aspect of the scope just outlined in broad categories, are not considered to be static or restricted to neatly defined boundaries, but are rather seen as involved in a deep mutuality of perpetual exchange and influence resulting in multidimensional, multi-level, multi-perspectival, dynamic multiplicities in which each aspect and element, at every level, is influencing and being influenced, forming and being formed.

The intention in presenting the general scope in such broad terms is to deliberately to soften and push the appearance of stricture associated with the common perception of boundaries outward for maximum inclusion, so as not to be constrained to the analysis of a list of reified, concretely defined particulars. It is meaningful to refer to CBT as something distinct from Gestalt. The signifieds of "CBT" or "Gestalt" recall the mental representations of the identities, contents etc. associated with the signifiers for practical purposes, and these can appear to have conceptually clearly-defined parameters. However, the signifiers refer beyond themselves, to something far more nebulous in the real world than can ever be completely and clearly signified - the general post-Kantian idea that reality is eternally beyond representation, a Derridean différance or perhaps even Haraway's situated knowledge - 
, each signifier refers to indicate a practical identity

Much of the coaching literature to be discussed in this chapter is given to a focus on specifics, be it a particular piece of research, criticism or theory etc. While the particular has an important role in this analysis, it is essential to see all particulars as radically interwoven and participatory, as in the paragraph above. Each provides an emphasis and appreciation of the full nature, extensive width and depth of coaching's embrace, range of influences and practical concerns. It also is important to add the observation that, at any given point within the scope, a similarly substantial multiplicity will be found to exist. 
Psychotherapy for example, as a category of scope, refers to only one domain of knowledge, among many others, within the embrace of coaching. Psychotherapy is its own full and complete multiplicity, comprising its own breadth and depth, variety and complexity, and is made no less rich or diverse for being considered a 'part' within the 'whole' complex of coaching. Thus the multiplicity of, say, psychotherapy is not, and can not, be simplified or constrained because of, or by means of its overlap or inclusion within coaching - this is important - the fullness of every domain must remain undiminished.

Coaching as a whole, along with the rest of the scope, at every point and at every level, is deliberately presented in this analysis as a kind of 'complex of complexes', or a 'multiplicity of multiplicities' in perpetual dynamic, exchange. To view coaching in this way may seem hyperbolic, vague, unnecessarily overcomplicated, or risking confusion at the expense of simplicity and clarity, but is I think, crucial in addressing some of the hidden implications of structure and simplicity (i.e. constraint). One goal of this analysis is to surface and challenge the implications of constraints (not the constraints themselves) and therefore needs to be able to extend beyond them. 

Consider - If coaching was a simple thing to define, organise, theorise and exercise, it would be clearly defined, well organised, comprehensively theorised and predictably exercised. But this is not the case. Coaching is complex, impossible to define (as a whole), lacks central organisation, has scattered theory, and is practiced and evidenced in widely different ways. The body of critical literature on coaching points to all of these issues and more, and coaching has been seeking answers to these issues in a number of ways. However, if the answers being sought to the big issues facing coaching - things such as its overall development and maturity, theoretical and scientific advance etc. - were to be found in the formulation of new simplicity or as a simple re-configuration of the plethora of existing, well-defined systems available to it, one might expect to have seen rapid, coherent, large-scale advances, easily integrated theory and research evidence, a formalised internal system of governance, clear and common standards etc. Again, despite successful and numerous advances in coaching in recent decades, this is not the case - coaching still struggles with core issues - its own identity, developmental trajectory, complexity, standards, ethics and integrating and evidencing its diversity.
My conclusion, and the premises for this analysis, is that there is no resolution in simplicity - if it were to be found there, it would have. Thus, the analysis deliberately emphasises, explores and describes the multiplicitous nature of coaching, without trying to solve it, as if it were a problem capable of being solved. 'Solutions', if they can be called that, the end towards which this thesis is aimed, will begin to emerge and suggest themselves from the multiplicity itself, in this and later chapters.



The implications of the above, brief description, can be summarised as follows: That plurality in coaching is not problematic in and of itself, it therefore does not need to be solved (it can't be and shouldn't be), however, incommensurability within the pluralism is problematic, and it can and should be solved. That, although something approaching complete commensurability is possible in coaching, or so I argue, it will not be attainable by the same means that produced the incommensurable. Similarly, if a solution can be found, it will also not resemble the processes or artefacts that it attempts to resolve - i.e. it can't be of the same kind, won't look the same etc.

The local commensurability that leads to the familiar pluralistic appearance of coaching, will remain as it is - localised, enabled and constrained by its own structures etc. (a pluralism of discrete "things") and can be theorised in familiar ways, at almost any level. Globalised commensurability however, cannot be local, constrained or discrete etc. and therefore cannot be theorised. That the view - mindsets, worldviews, processes and so on - that produced the field of fragmentation problematised above, is not capable of resolving the fragmentation, and that a different view - mindset, worldview, processes etc. will be needed to resolve it. The new view will not resemble the the old one, although it will recover and retain all of it, and acceptance will require change to a series of axiomatic assumptions. Finally, that the means of enacting anything at all in the new view - be it small-scale theory, an individual coaching conversation, or  large-scale research project - can employ, but can no longer be limited to the same assumptions and strategic choices that constrained the old view and its products. 

It is towards these eventual ends that this analysis is oriented, however challenges remain. As introduced above, coaching is a complex and complicated discipline and navigating that complexity with a view to eventually addressing the complications is not simple. To begin this exploration, an initial, navigable pathway into the complexity of coaching is needed. Without a definite starting point and an initial form or structure to frame the analysis, the complexity I aim to address is difficult to manage and becomes a problem of its own. For example, above I referred to the nature of coaching as a 'multiplicity of multiplicities'. While this is might be a useful way of seeing the discipline of coaching and describing the terrain to be covered in this analysis, multiplicities can't be defined, they refer to a core characteristic of coaching, but resist high resolution description, modelling and analysis etc. In a multiplicity, a term (discussed below) used by Deleuze and Guattari to refer to a characteristic of the nature of reality, there is no centre to anything. Reality is "rhizomatic", it branches off in all directions and all points are connected to all others. Thus, from the point of view of the multiplicity, all entry points to a multiplicity, as well as all points within it, are not only equally valid and, for analytical purposes therefore arbitrary, but are themselves multiplicities and therefore intimately connected with everything else. Structure in a multiplicity is an eventual emergent, not an antecedent organising principle.

Therefore, for an analysis such as this one that is both concerned with structure and requires it to proceed, multiplicity as a starting position is not suitable. While multiplicity is a core aspect of the conceptual apparatus to be used in this analysis and elsewhere in the thesis, it must remain the background to the structure used to conduct the analysis. To provide analytical structure, prominent discourses in coaching are proposed as initial organising systems, or conceptual 'containers'. Although each discourse is a multiplicity itself, they are also differentiable large-scale conceptual systems, broadly conceptually coherent, and therefore provide a series of reference points that can be used to structure the analysis. 
Five prominent discourses have been chosen - the modern, post-modern, systemic, processual and pragmatic. Several reasons are behind the selection of this analytic strategy and the choice of the discourses themselves. Worldviews, another large-scale form of multiplicity, highly relevant across coaching, intersect broadly with the discourse strategy chosen, allowing the association and inclusion of additional factors to the discourse strategy while maintaining a central structure. In addition, the intersection of discourse and worldview considered above is itself helpful in framing discussions of the philosophical, theoretical and other factors  that underpin each. Finally, though they are not exhaustively representative of coaching as a whole, the discourses chosen do cover a substantial majority of the scope considered in this analysis.

Framed this way, the scope of the analysis is set deliberately wide, intentionally embracing the full extent of the complexity of coaching. The purpose of doing this is to discover if insights can be gained and used to address some of the outstanding issues that fragmented complexity creates for contemporary coaching. Discourses are chosen as conceptual containers that help organise the analysis and frame accessible the wide range of material to be discussed. In addition to being differentiable themselves, discourses also permit the organised discussion of other factors, such as those associated with worldviews and their underpinning philosophical systems. This strategy will hopefully enable the analysis to demonstrate several features latent in the scope considered - coaching as a whole and all of the factors that influence it - that are problematic in the natural development of coaching, as well as offering new ways of addressing specific critiques that confront the discipline.
The analysis describes several characteristics inherent in the content of the scope itself, as well as those that the content implies, frames these in terms of the discourses and uses them to draw a set of conclusions that will form the basis of the chapters to follow: a conceptual framework, philosophy, and a discussion of the implications for coaching.
# Approach
f
On the face of it, the scope of the analysis can seem to be constituted by a vast and complex multitude of discrete, differentiated "things" or systems of things, depending on the context or perspective taken. These can be seen individually (differentiated individuals or atoms) or systematised (differentiated systems) into a multitude of another class of complexities that extend along several dimensions.
Differentiations and distinctions are a pervasive analytical feature in themselves and are developed extensively in later chapters in the thesis. Throughout, they are used as conceptual signifiers and are not intended to suggest ontological objects or systems. Precision regarding differentiations, distinctions, definitions etc., is almost impossible to achieve given the nature of the analysis. For example, differentiating between coaching and psychotherapy, or between modernity and post modernity in a precise way is practically impossible. There is too much overlap between and within the domains themselves to be precise in any generally applicable sense. What individual terms refer to is therefore somewhat mutable. While high degrees of precision are not needed in this analysis, they are not neglected, either. The thesis as a whole proposes a means by which arbitrary levels of precision can be made available for any occasion.

Such a plurality is difficult to approach analytically, as valid points of departure are as numerous as the plurality itself. While points of departure are arguably arbitrary, I have chosen to use discourse analysis as a guide for this analysis. Being relatively few in number, discourses provide a somewhat manageable starting point, and serve several other useful functions. 



A helpful way of approaching the diversity, complexity and mutability discussed above, that also anticipates later development and discussion in this chapter and the remainder of the thesis, is to use Deleuze's concept of a "multiplicity".



To do this - to address the complexity, variety and the fullness of the scope considered - the analysis uses a series of discourses as logical containers of complexity to make the analysis manageable. It looks into their nature, influence, implications and consequences as well as their mutual interactions, both within and beyond the boundaries of coaching. In this way, discourses are used as a means of traversing many of the boundaries within coaching, and those that separate coaching from the rest of the world. The literature is considered through and alongside the chosen discourses, and the analysis of both are supplemented by the use of inferential logic that give access to inherent aspects that may not be obviously apparent, but are nevertheless important. 

Importantly, the analysis is concerned not only with the content of the literature per se, but the structural aspects that underpin it. As with coaching's complexity above, there is a prima facie aspect to things as they appear - the face value of a given theory for example, which is it's "content" or its form, and how it may differ from another theory etc. - and there is a dynamic, structural aspect to it, upon which it relies for its content or form - the presuppositions it requires, for example. Thus, there is a "width" aspect to the analysis, that is concerned with the population of what is included, and there is a "depth" aspect that is concerned with the underlying structural dynamics involved in what has been included. Obviously these aspects cannot be separated in any final sense, their interactivity is a core topic extensively developed later in the thesis, but the pragmatic utility of conceptually differentiating them remains important for the purposes of this discussion. 



The analysis Introduces the method and discourses to be used, discusses their selection and relationships to one another, before viewing the critical and broader literature through them. Discussion focusses on both the surface appearance of the content of discourse and literature, and considers them in the light of their underlying structural dynamics. Inference is used where appropriate to point out important aspects across the whole scope of the analysis. 

The conclusion draws aspects of the analysis together, considers their implications, and begins to suggest features of possible strategies that might be used to address them. The conclusions from this chapter form the basis of, and flow seamlessly into the chapters that follow, specifically - being developed in the conceptual chapter, implemented in the philosophy chapter and their implications and practicalities explored in the implications and contributions chapter.  

# asd

This "localised" appearance of organisation (see below), coherence etc., while it occurs at every level, is what gives the impression of fragmentation when seen from an appropriate level. e.g. theoretical proliferation  at the level of coaching as a discipline. Localised coherence identifies and enumerates coherent objects or systems that answer to some signifier and which populate coaching. Cognitive Behavioural Therapy (CBT), or constructivism, for example, two named systems in the population of coaching that refer to some-thing such that it is distinguishable from the other. Each has enough of its own internal consistency, logical coherence etc., so that it can be considered a whole thing and can be named. Both CBT and constructivism are important features of the coaching landscape, each is different in origin, assumption, focus, kind and scale, each is individually, locally coherent and logically differentiable etc., but they are both still 'parts' - objects or systems of coherence - that are constituents of a much larger whole, called "coaching". 
While each (CBT and constructivism) has an important role in coaching, neither is completely compatible with the other by virtue of their own terms, and therefore can't be made compatible by means of their own terms - i.e. they are incommensurable with each other, appear as fragmented in coaching and dis-integrated from one another (to some degree, not ultimately). This implies that whatever it is that could possibly organise, cohere etc. or make CBT and constructivism commensurable, is not to be found within or between the systems - CBT and constructivism - themselves. The means of making the two commensurable must therefore come from "outside" of each, somehow, say by an addition to or development in each system, by subsuming the two in a meta-system of some kind, or perhaps by discovering a fundamental commonality from which they both emerge and subsequently speciate. 

Coaching, when seen as a whole, does not have such a means of integration. As such, it accepts and retains each as members of its population, complete with their fragmented appearance, and celebrates their diversity as part of the plurality of coaching. Again, viewing coaching as a whole, it looks like CBT is one thing "over here", and constructivism is another, separate thing "over there". Because both add value to coaching and should be retained, the unsolved problem of how they exist together in the same reality without contradiction, is subordinated to the differentiated value that they add. In other words, it seems that fragmentation is seen as a higher-quality problem to live with than exclusion of one system would be in order to avoid contradiction. Following this logic, if end-to-end coherence was a prerequisite for coaching - i.e. that only commensurable objects and systems were permitted to populate coaching as a whole - I doubt that coaching could exist, and if it did, it would be dramatically poorer. However, fragmentation is still a problem, a serious one, as I argue, pervasive throughout coaching, especially when seen as a whole. Fragmentation, the absence of natural and logical relationality, is the kind of thing that is at the root of many of the most severe critiques of coaching, as well as a barrier to coaching's organic development.

"Localised" here, means internal consistency emerging from constrained, bounded, or contingent factors. It is a conceptual tool used to differentiate - it does not denote an ontological reality. Localisation is ultimately arbitrary and contextually informed. For example, CBT, one of many alternatives in coaching, can be localised as a theoretical and technical orientation as a subset coaching. However, coaching itself can be localised by a similar pattern at a different scale when contrasted with, say, physics. Localisation applies to philosophical and epistemological (etc.) categories, as above, but also to another other common place where deep, localised coherence occurs - in the practice of individual coaches, especially mature ones. Other localisations are arguably present, too - institutional or educational bodies, for example may specialise and formalise accordingly around some aspect of coaching APECS and executive coaching, for instance.
Local coherence (organised, consistent, inter-related etc.), the way I am using the term here, presides systematically over a definite set of particulars, distinct and varied as they may be, in such a way that they can operate as something unified or relational, albeit bounded, over a range of possibilities, contexts etc. For instance, a coach may select a range of technical tools and methods that map together coherently under a personal coaching philosophy, constituting a localised, integrated, coherent, coaching system, that can be applied in a range of cases and contexts. Doing so, it is the constraints she places on her personal practice that enable it, define it, and actually create it. The same factors that enable her practice are simultaneously the ones that constrain it, separate it and where relationality is lost, fragment it. She may, for example configure her practice and system to coach early-career rising stars in politics. She may not be as able to coach early-career rising stars in genome research with the same system, and she may not be easily able to relate her practice to an equally coherent practice of coach configured around elite athletes. Thus, beyond localised boundaries, coherence can seem to break down again, and locally coherent complexity gives way to globalised fragmentation. 

A number of considerations flow from the above observations, for example what is coherent vs. incoherent, localised vs. globalised are ultimately arbitrary simplifications that belie inherent multiplicity and depend on interactions with constellations of contingencies and and contexts. For example, 

The contingent, and ultimately arbitrary nature of many of the things discussed and implied in the short discussion above - concepts, categories, even physical objects, is a crucially important aspect of this analysis and is a principle developed extensively elsewhere in the thesis - phil chapter esp. 
Another, different sort of consideration appears, too - what I refer to as 'partialism'.

>note: I like the word 'partialism', it seems apropos - an 'ism' that totalises parts - but problematically, it is widely associated with sexual dysfunction in the psychology literature. If you object to its use, I am not wedded to it.

Partialism, the way I use it, refers to the error that arises from the necessary, but insufficient recognition of the world as necessarily, radically multiple, without the commensurate recognition of the world as necessarily, radically, relationally whole, and therefore cannot possibly be fragmented in any ultimate sense. I do not mean "whole" as in a totalising, final, complete, comprehensive whole - an ultimate unity of some kind - but wholeness as in ultimately undifferentiable, a radically relational wholeness from which no one thing can ultimately be separated from another. A number of important implications flow from this position. For example, above I claimed that not only was coaching multiplicitous, but that at every point in its multiplicity, exists another multiplicity, a multiplicity of multiplicities - this view can seem to compound complications, but as I hope to show, it is the path to freedom from them. It also implies that boundaries of every kind are ultimately arbitrary, which in turn presents problems for definition, ontology, epistemology, identity and other core considerations - these and other issues are recognised but are discussed later.

To continue, partialism is a problem I have perceived in the status quo of coaching - too much emphasis and reliance on the inclusion of many, diverse parts in the absence of an organisational system that demonstrates its wholeness in all occasions, and leading to philosophical and pragmatic positions that can be described as pluralism, perspectivism and eclecticism etc. As above, there is more value in the inclusion of a diversity of incommensurables, than there is in the exclusion of everything that is not commensurable. However, also as above, a field of incommensurability at the disciplinary level is deeply problematic and must be addressed. 

As such, pluralism and perspectivism, can be thought of as the acceptance of an onto-epistemic diversity of reality. The methodological relationality between the object and the appearance then is the final part of the eclecticism of the occasion. In other words, if the world is in fact multiplictic in object and appearance (onto-epistemic), then some thing (ontology) appears the way it does (epistemology) by virtue of the perspective taken on it. If something shifts, say, perspective, then ontology and epistemology shift with it. e.g. If I consider an ancient Greek vase and appreciate its beauty, ontology the object as art, and epistemology is an appreciation of aesthetics. If my perspective changes, the vase remains, but this time I consider it's physical mass or monetary value at auction. If so, the epistemology shifts to a scientific quantity or financial possibility. Thus a pluralistic, but fragmented world is maintained - it is possible to take multiple, valid perspectives, and to gain divergent, valid knowledge from each perspective. How these are to be made commensurable, however is not obvious - weight and aesthetics, for example. The ability to select between these modal positions is then methodologically eclectic, in that for each arrangement, 

. Perspectivism, a term I believe originally associated with Nietzsche, in which "the extent to which knowledge has any sense at all, the world is knowable: but it may be interpreted differently, it has not one sense behind it, but hundreds of senses - “Perspectivity.”" [@nietzscheDelphiCompleteWorks2015] Book 5 s. 481. Pluralism, in various guises, a philosophical and methodological cornerstone of coaching [@utryPluralisticApproachCoaching2022]  [@clutterbuckCoachingReflectionLiberated2010]  [@teeCoachingPracticed2022] see section 2 esp. is taken up into integrative practices in a variety of ways, as discussed above, with the general idea that multiple perspectives disclose multiple truths giving a more complete composite of any given occasion as well as multiplicity of ways in which coaching can unfold. A central assumption underlying this approach is that there is "something" that can be seen more completely by viewing it from multiple perspectives and somehow aggregating what is disclosed from each of those perspectives - like the parable of the blind men and the elephant. While there is much positive to be taken from this kind of view, the assumption that there is an object there at all, much less one that can be fully known by assembling its partial disclosures, is far more problematic than it might seem - this is a feature of the analysis taken up later in the chapter.

To summarise thus far - coaching as a whole is complex, made up of many different things that have origins in many different places, and which can be arranged and rearranged into an indefinitely varied number of ways, from theory to practice. However, in all cases these arrangements have so far only emerged within localising constraints of some kind, whether this be a theoretical orientation, personal practice or institutional specialism etc. I contend that, while localised integrations are good things, possible and commonplace, the discipline of coaching thus far, does not have an equivalent systematic organising principle around which to arrange the vast diversity of its contents. There are a number of consequences to this being the case. For example, while integrated, localised practice, research etc. is made possible by being able to articulate and formalise the specifics of a given system, characteristics that might allow the local system to be brought closer to being "scientific", provide a basis for rigour, theoretical precision and so on, these data, theories etc. are not readily portable across their localising boundaries. As a consequence, the evidence, knowledge, theory etc. that is generated on the basis of localised systems will always reflect, or occur within the constraints of the localised system that generated them, and will be difficult to generalise to different circumstances. Thus, knowledge, action, theory, research etc. are all of a kind with the constraining factors that allow it to be a system of exploration in the first place. CBT-based practice or research is not going to return Gestalt, spiritual or cultural outcomes, data or theory the way that those other systems would. As such, efforts aimed at generally systemising coaching that rely on localised principles will fail because the strategy that they employ is based on, and includes the limitations of the problem it is being employed to solve. Proliferation of theory therefore results in proliferation or practice and research which results in proliferation of outcomes, research and theory - the fragmentation in action simply recapitulates its own nature and reproduces the original plurality, plus some more.   

If coaching as a whole wishes to mature, which I believe is the case, it must be able to articulate an organisational system that operates across the full range particulars of which it is constituted. Not only this, but because of its wide and growing adoption in so many different spheres of life, the importance it has in the actual lives of people and the world at large, it has, as a discipline, an ethical obligation to self-organise. Issues such as these are what I collectively term "governance" issues - structural, normative, quality, ethical, standards etc. features at a global organisational level.

Against this backdrop, relying on practitioner-led or otherwise localised integrations, is insufficient and, I would argue, an unethical abdication of responsibility by the discipline onto its members. If coaching as a whole wants its members to construct integrative, coherent practices, but itself has no normative philosophical, theoretical, technical etc. framework, it runs serious sustainability, ethical and reputational risks, it will have no means to control membership, set and maintain standards, conduct cohesive research etc. However, to accomplish the above, coaching must first be able to conceptualise and model itself sufficiently well that the models etc. so derived can be formalised - that is given some degree of precise description - such that they can be brought into a proper theoretical system, which can be tested in the field. This, despite various efforts to resolve the issue, has not yet been accomplished, and it is to the furtherance of this endeavour that this analysis is ultimately aimed.

# Context
The problems discussed above are by no means unique to coaching, in fact, problems like these seem to be the norm in every other field, too. Psychotherapy, a field deeply consequential to coaching, for example, dedicated an entire sub-discipline and almost a century of effort to solving their own instance of the integration problem, and are (in my opinion) not much closer to the ideal of integration than when they began. I say this acknowledging that a great deal of advance has been made in psychotherapy, which includes integrations, but I also note that even the strategies used to attain integration, themselves are fragmented.  

Integration is no mean feat - Anchin [@anchinPursuingUnifyingParadigm2008] described his view of what integration would need to look like as follows:

>"to my way of thinking, unification in psychotherapy means the development of a *singular* paradigm that pulls together and interrelates, in one organizing theoretical framework, all of the major accumulating elements of knowledge pertaining to personality, psychopathology, and psychotherapy. Moreover, such a framework, operating as a *unifying* paradigm, would fundamentally guide how we think about and conceptualize the wealth of phenomena pertinent to psychotherapy, how we scientifically study those phenomena, and how, in the domain of practice, we apply the products of those efforts and synthesize them with the principles, procedures, and processes of psychotherapy.
>Emphases in original
>Anchin p. 312

It's not that individual systems of psychotherapy don't work, they undoubtedly do. In 1936 Saul Rosenzweig famously declared the Dodo bird verdict in psychotherapy - that all therapies work (with patients) even if they don't necessarily work with each other (they're inconsistent among themselves). He was after the so called "common factors" of psychotherapy (among other things) as a possible integration point. At the time, there were a mere handful of competing theories being practiced, in 2019, Norcross asks "Which of 500-plus therapies should be studied, taught, or bought?" p. 6. Using these two markers in time, psychotherapy theories grew in number from very few to 500 systems in the space in a little more than 80 years. By those numbers alone, it doesn't seem as if integration, let alone unification is any closer today than it was decades ago, it's arguably (much) further away. If integration at the level of the discipline was working, it would be reasonable to expect the number of alternative theories to converge, not proliferate. In the preface to the same edition, however, the authors claim that psychotherapy integration has entered "young adulthood" and that "Integration - or the older term, eclecticism - is now well established as the modal orientation of mental health professionals" p. vii.

To my mind, there is no equation in meaning or principle between "eclecticism" and "integration". It seems like a version of organised pluralism is being sold as if it were a coherent whole - effectively resigning to the notion that integration is possible. In coaching, similar attainments  - "managed eclecticism" [@clutterbuckCoachingReflectionLiberated2010] - are lauded as a sign of maturity for the individual practitioner, an argument with which I agree.  However, again, it is at the disciplinary level - be it psychotherapy or coaching - that the ability to "manage" the diversity over which it presides is weak, even if localised, coherent and effective integration is possible, even the "modal norm" of practitioners.

It has long been argued that no single system of psychotherapy, nor indeed of coaching, is adequate to all possible occasions - humans and the world are too variable, complex and multifaceted to be accounted for by any single known system. In the absence of such a global system, a pluralism of approaches relevant to the possibilities likely to be encountered in the practice of a given coach is a viable alternative strategy. At the local level, the complexity of coaching is a much easier problem to solve and from small beginnings, it can organically mature, become rigorous, repeatable and measurable. Given that coaching practitioners themselves are widely varied across specialisms, contexts and genres of coaching, this seems like an imminently practical approach, and, for practitioners and other localised specialisms, I believe it is. The above - localised integrative, globally complicated - is, to my mind the current state of the art in coaching today. It is true that more advanced systems have been conceptualised and offered - some advocate for a meta-theoretical approach [@westernCoachingMentoringCritical2012]  [@chapmanIntegratedExperientialCoaching2010], while others consider pragmatism as a possible way forward [@ostrowskiCallClarityPragmatism2023]  [@bachkirovaOldWineNew2019]. Each approach has much to offer and will be discussed below.

However, notwithstanding the possible ways forward just mentioned, several problems seem evident to me, considering the roughly outlined status quo above - a complex, multidimensional field, frequently integrated in theory and practice in localised cases, but remaining elusive at the global, disciplinary level. One is that, for the discipline to mature, it must be able to say, as a discipline, coherent things about what it is, what it does, its modes of operation, its efficacy across contexts, its capacity for normative assessment, how it upholds ethical standards and so on.

Another is that, even if all of these things can be done at the level of the individual 

In many cases, complexity seems to have attracted something of a negative reputation [^citations]. It's as if it's become something to be avoided or a problem to overcome, as if simplicity itself is a virtue and that until even the most complex thing has been reduced to a simple fact, statement or atom of knowledge, no one should pay it any mind. I think that several reasons are involved in this trend what is commonly called the "attention economy" which competes fiercely for the scarce resource of human attention,   a Impatience and decreased attention spans, as volumes of information, especially over digital platforms increase, result in a fiercely competitive attention economy in which relevance and duration of interest are increasingly squeezed [@lorenz-spreenAcceleratingDynamicsCollective2019], with detrimental effects  to almost every aspect of human life


- physical and mental health, relationships and meaning The idea that the long form of "complex" thought or action, of society or knowledge is an unnecessary inconvenience that all goes away with an executive summary, should be compressed into a soundbite or be compressed to the length of a tweet. But even this is not enough, having been processed and encapsulated into an easy-to-swallow pill, it must also immediately connect to other things already known, make sense and find it's own place within us, preferably with a satisfying "click".

But simplicity doesn't exist. It may seem a glib statement to make, but Popper's falsifiability razor can easily be applied. Find something, anything at all that is "simple" and the statement is falsified.
Simplicity is at best an illusion, at worst a pernicious fallacy, and in all cases, a deeply misleading belief. Simplicity, in my view at least, is what you get when you exclude as much as possible from any given occasion and then reduce what's left to its mere appearance. To say, for example, that matter is "simple" because it's all made of atoms, is 


all    Complexity of any given aspect (like theory), and the diversity of aspects (many different theories) in coaching is the core focus of this chapter, and indeed the whole thesis. Complexity in coaching has a diverse range of kinds, origins and causes - some complexity accrues through coaching's close associations with external fields such as psychotherapy, adult learning and many others. Some comes from the range of coaching use cases and contexts, from sports, executive and life coaching, to health and spirituality - all of which have coaching applications. In addition, the world as a whole, rapidly changing as it does, exerts continuous influence across every aspect of coaching, from technology, politics and socioeconomics to identity, ecology and social justice - all of which are clear and present influences in contemporary coaching. 
In a sentence, whatever view one chooses to take, coaching is widely diverse and complex. Coaching is also a young and emerging discipline in the process of its own self-formation, individuation and maturation, and as such is confronted with a wide variety of challenges from internal organisation, to purpose, standards, ethics and so on. 

As it stands, the interior status of coaching is far from well-formed - for instance, the discipline is pre-paradigmatic, lacks a substantial theory of its own, has a fragmented and incomplete knowledge base, lacks evidence in places and its efficacy is poorly understood, it is difficult to measure, regulate etc. While these criticisms have some truth to them and must be addressed, doing so is complicated by the fact that the same complexity that characterises coaching is a core driver of the problem. Incompatibility in philosophical presuppositions, incommensurable theoretical positions, fragmented research and evidence etc. are all known current problems. Efforts to address all of these issues and the general advancement of coaching as a discipline are ongoing with progress being made across the board. In addition, despite the internal and external complexity and fragmented diversity just mentioned, coaching is successful in practice - it works, is growing rapidly and is widely sought after in the marketplace. 
There is a great deal that coaching already does very well in both theory and practice - it endeavours to be theoretically grounded, evidence-based and conscientiously practiced, it is concerned with high standards, positive client outcomes and submits itself to voluntary supervision, has high ethical standards, and is in my experience, very hard-working.

It is in this somewhat ambiguous space - the contrast of developmental progress and practical success on one hand, and a largely fragmented diversity of interior disorganisation at the disciplinary level, on the other - that this analysis aims to contribute. To progress beyond current barriers, I argue, coaching needs to develop a "way" of seeing, being and doing that is capable of producing interior consistency of the current diversity, make accessible the inherent complexity, and be able to adapt organically to the perpetual and inevitable changes that will continue to face the discipline. If this were possible, answers to existing criticisms should emerge in a natural pathway of development. The present analysis aims to discuss the status quo and move towards an articulation of such a "way".

The complexity of coaching is not something that must be overcome, simplified or its diversity unified as if diversity or complexity are inherently problematic. In my view, this is neither possible nor desirable - but the range of what there is, must be brought into a fundamental rapprochement so that the oppositions, contradictions and incommensurabilities that currently pervade coaching, can be given  to a true, organic, relationality. Simplicity, especially of the technical kind, is not an answer, nor is it a direction along which answers lie - neither coaching, nor the world that it serves is simple. The way seems therefore to be the path into, and through the complexity, not around or above it. 

> "We have to move away from our attachment to simplicity, our desire to explain more with less, and to believe that we can find universal formulas that are claimed to work in every coaching situation. The more closely we investigate the nuances of coaching practice, the greater the complexity of what we do is revealed." [@bachkirovaDevelopmentalCoachingWorking2022]

# Discourses
The discourses considered in this analysis were chosen for their influence in coaching and their relevance to the aims of the analysis. Discourses associated with the modern, postmodern, pragmatic, systemic and processual worldviews have been chosen. It is acknowledged that these discourses are themselves subject to complexity and plurality within themselves and their associated debates [@cascardiSubjectModernity1995] [@habermasPhilosophicalDiscourseModernity2007]. In other words, there is no single, clearly defined “modern” discourse in terms of either content or structure and perceptions of modernity in general, varies widely. However, as I mentioned above, it remains meaningful to discuss the conceptual category of things signified by the term "the discourse of modernity" without falling prey to its internal diversity and complexity. 



the influence of the modern discourse in coaching no matter what in general despite its potential complexity.

Discourse analysis is a qualitative research method focused on studying language use beyond the sentence level, considering the social and cultural contexts that give language meaning. It examines how language constructs and is constructed by social realities, ideologies, and power relations. There are several approaches to discourse analysis, each with its theoretical underpinnings and methodologies:

### Modernist - 

Reductionism and Holism
Maybe reductionism and holism can be considered discourses on their own - each implies an orientation towards whatever it is looking at. 
What they have in common - an objective view of the world, quantitative, realist, materialist, positivist. Whereas the former tends to view reality and humans in terms of its lowest common denominator, the latter tends to view the same in terms of the systems in which those atoms coexist.

Classical modernism and its resurgence in neoliberalism
The neoliberal perspective is arguably more systemic and globalised than classical liberalism with its focus on localised or national boundaries. But what they share is the "exterior" view of the world.

### Reductionist

For Deleuze, to take the substantive as differentiated and objective - e.g. the one or the many - is a "distorted dialectic which proceeds by opposition", which is an error in which difference is reified or actualised, made ontological, static and authoritative,  "Instead of the enormous opposition between the one and the many, there is only the variety of multiplicity - in other words, difference."

There is something here about the rehabilitation of relationality. In the sense that Deleuze means pluralism as such as an ontological error in that it's the conceptual overly loose mesh of a distorted dialectic that misses the point of the multiplicity. Differentiation doesn't lead to ontological categorization but is the manifest appearance of difference in repetition. Therefore pluralism seen as an indefinitely numerous population of contents positions perspectives and so on Is highly problematic.
### Holist
Systemic dynamic
This is taken as an extension of the modernist discourse above in that it takes what the reductive view assumes to be a reality of particulate fundamentals, and reviews it in inter-objective relationality. For example, the basic units, or quantum, of humanity, in the reductionist worldview is the individual, whereas the quantum of the systems view is the social. 

### Postmodernist constructive
### Pragmatic
### Processual


•Overall approach

- Intro definition and strategy
	- Discuss discourse analysis and why it’s been chosen
	- Discuss FDA and the levels that it will traverse
	- 5 named discourses – Modernism, postmodernism, systemic, pragmatic, processual
		- Assumption that this covers the majority of coaching. Will be some exceptions like transpersonal
- Discuss the elements of the discursive formations to be used
	- Q – How detailed does the description and the discussion of the discourses need to be?
- Locate the elements discussed above in the coaching literature and establish its presence and influence
- Infer theoretical and philosophical presuppositions of each
	- Discuss compatibility at different levels - the width and depth aspects
	- Incommensurabilities at different levels
- Discussion
	- Given the presence of the five identified dominant discourses consider their interactions constraints and enablements
	- Inter-discourse assumptions – surfaces, objects, substances, categories and history
	- The characteristics [enablements and constraints ] of the current system and status quo
	- Fixation with surfaces and objects and the overdomination of the discourses that emphasise them, the Incoherence of a process-free ontology
- Conclusion and feed into next chapters
	- Given the presence of difference, whatever systematic approach must be able to address them
	- Infer the characteristics and capabilities of a hypothetical system
	- Infer characteristics and capabilities of the present system

# The literature
Unsurprisingly, coaching attracts a range of criticism, most of which concerns its internal weaknesses e.g. consistent rigour in research design and quality, or structural gaps, e.g. the explanatory power of coaching theory over coaching outcomes. The inherent complexity of coaching makes general development of the discipline and answering critiques like these more difficult because of the sheer volume of it and the variety of forms and contexts that coaching can take. Rigorous research design for say, a Cognitive Behavioural coaching intervention with a product development team in a tech start-up, would look very different to a Solutions Focussed coaching intervention in a life-transition, charity context. The issues, approaches, conditions, goals and contexts involved in just these two examples could vary widely, making the coaching strategies and outcomes etc. difficult to relate between the cases. While rigour is possible in both cases, design, intervention, process, etc. would be sharply divergent, and while positive outcomes might be gained in both cases, it is not obvious, prima facie, how these come about, what validity criteria can be applied to them, what evidence, theory and knowledge might to look like as a consequence, remains difficult to pull together. It is not that discipline-wide formal integration is required, or even indicated, but that a fundamental relationality within the diversity inherent in coaching, remains elusive. Thus the complexity that characterises coaching persists - from its various sources and influences to practice, applications and contexts, and onward into theory, knowledge, governance etc. - it is a wide landscape of multiplicity, the underlying unity of which, especially at the level of the discipline, has been difficult to locate.

This complex multiplicity both enables and constrains coaching as a discipline. On the one hand, it is an enormous asset that underpins the richness at the heart of coaching, gives coaching the flexibility to address the range of needs and opportunities that it faces, and enables its ability to contribute to positive outcomes as widely as it does. On the other hand, this complex multiplicity is also problematic, in that it makes coaching nearly impossible to formalise (describe rigorously and scientifically) or define, at the level of the discipline. However, integration is pervasive in coaching at the level of the individual practitioner. I would argue further, that the deepest integration occurs, in the coaching occasion, at the intersection of coach, client and context. If integration is possible in all coaching occasions, constrained as they will be by the full range of contingencies present in the occasion then practitioners must be doing something with the complexity in coaching that the discipline is having difficulty doing.  

As a result, there is something of an organisational split between the individual coach practitioner, researcher or educator, and the wider discipline. For beginner coaches, the complexity of coaching is an initial "problem" - they must navigate the possibilities offered, make choices from the available multiplicity or innovate their own, develop a coherent system of personal practice, specialised on a given domain, that must develop over time etc. The "problem" of complexity for individual coaches recedes in a process of natural developmental or maturation until it is no longer a problem. The "problem" of complexity for the discipline of coaching, however, is somewhat larger and more intractable, but a similar process of development and maturation seems to be ongoing at the the level of the discipline as it does for the individual coach. For the discipline, all of the indefinite variety that exists within coaching must somehow be made coherent (it must hang together, in an internally consistent way) if coaching wishes to mature, develop a science of its own, and address some of the more substantial critiques that it faces. 

Generally speaking, the critical literature follows a similar pattern, in my reading of it. For the most part, the argument is not that coaching isn't efficacious - it is widely accepted that coaching works - it is that coaching has little idea about what works or why. Thus the critical literature, while it does point out issues related to the coach, researcher, educator etc. the emphasis of criticism is on the discipline itself. Thus practice (that is, the aspect of coaching in which the complexity of coaching is organised, integrated etc. by an individual practitioner) is not where criticism is concentrated - it is the discipline as a whole that is more thoroughly criticised - e.g. that it lacks evidence, theory, a comprehensive knowledge-base etc. Thus coaching as a discipline is not able to do what it widely requires its practitioners to do. For a maturing discipline, this state of affairs could result in a range of issues - standards, ethics, best practice, education and so on - are all impacted. In addition, relying on localised integration alone, without the normative influence of the discipline as a whole is in a very real sense an abdication of responsibility of primary organisational and structural development by the discipline onto the practitioner. The literature is critical of coaching on this front, too - e.g. coaching shouldn't think of professionalisation because these are all aspects of organisation and structure that a profession would require - without which governance issues such as regulation, professional membership, global standards, quality etc. would not be possible. 


Coaching is complex, and it is in this complexity, I argue that much of the flexibility of coaching is to be found, it is not something that should be simplified - the world is too complex. If coaching is to serve the world, the "substance" of what it can offer the world "can only be uncovered through recognition of the complexity of our practice that is concomitant with the rapidly increasing complexity of the organizations, social life and the changing environment within which coaching takes place." [@bachkirovaDevelopmentalCoachingWorking2022] p. 14



This chapter attempts to identify and analyse a range of content items and their underlying dynamics, present throughout the discipline of coaching. These items have widespread and arguably critical implications for every aspect of coaching, from the development of individual practice to discipline-wide theory and must be treated seriously.

I argue that, while many of these items are acknowledged and a great deal about them is already known, substantial gaps remain. Taken collectively, these items constitute an enormously complex, diverse, and multifaceted field of considerations that are difficult to contend with. 


As a result, knowledge remains fragmented (to varying degrees), is generally partially appreciated and often poorly understood.



items and their dynamics and is reflected in the literature, this knowledge and the literature that reflects it is fragmented - i.e. it remains both partial and poorly integrated.  

These items can sometimes seem simple and explicit - e.g. coaching theory lags practice. Whether acknowledged explicitly in the content of an occasion or not, there always subsists within it an underlying structural dynamic. 

that produces,   , but are always implicit.  explicitly visible e.g. in the content of the literature, coaching practice etc. but they always subsist generally in the content of practice, research, supervision, education etc. as latent, underlying structures and dynamics that give rise to the range of their surface appearance in the literature, practice, research etc. 
(e.g. a call for empirical evidence in some context presupposes that the complexity inherent in that context can be modelled sufficiently well, formalised, measured and generalised sufficiently well to produce a theory that can be empirically tested across instances of that context) 

In either case, explicit or implied, I argue that these issues present challenges and have impacts that extend beyond what their face value may suggest, and their importance and implications can be covered over as a consequence. 

While imperfect registration, apprehension, interpretation and consequent knowledge etc. of any occasion is considered axiomatic - perfect, complete and final apprehension, knowledge etc. is simply impossible - a systematic approach to not only reduce the inevitable partiality in any occasion, and to integrate a greater range of differences possible in any occasion seems to be a worthwhile pursuit.    

Partial registration, appreciation and interpretation of issues results in turn in responses, action and patterns of thought that are constrained by the same partiality, and thus efforts to accommodate or overcome the issues  

A fuller, more complete appreciation of the content and dynamics of these issues would enable many of the ongoing activities and issues in coaching to proceed in ways that may not otherwise be available. However, a more complete approach is not simply a matter of paying closer attention or considering alternative perspectives, though these do help, because the issues themselves are products of the problems that 

and more than their face the more visible forms  that could benefit from being more completely seen and understood. I argue that completeness, the way I mean it here, can seem difficult to achieve for a number of reasons and is infrequently given the attention it deserves. 
First is the sheer number of possibilities that are present in and available to a given coaching occasion - e.g. a coach practitioner and client deciding the parameters of a discussion, the potential issues that may arise, the connectivity inherent in every client occasion, contexts, models of application, applicable theory etc. The case is similar for researchers, educators, administrators, theorists etc.
Second is that, for any given aspect of an occasion, any number of viable perspectives are available - perhaps the issue can be seen as a case of skill acquisition, perhaps of state management, historical analysis, dialogical emergence etc. 
Other dimensions of complexity include context, culture, personal capacities of the coach and the client, goals, contract conditions, limitations etc.

This lack of completeness, argued to be the status quo in coaching, varies in degree and kind, but in all cases, has restrictive effects on a range of ongoing developmental efforts, such as practice, research and theorising, in coaching at all levels. Being able to address these issues in a more complete way, offer pathways to resolutions, and enable a move beyond the restrictions they impose, could allow for alternative ways of addressing the catalogue of challenges that faces coaching as a whole. 
While this analysis emphasises the issues to be discussed at the level of the discipline - i.e. what the issues and their effects mean for coaching as a whole - other levels and aspects such as supervision, individual practice, research etc. are always-already implicated, and are explored where appropriate.


## The issues
The analysis extends beyond the immediate content of some facet of coaching, such as a theory or criticism, to include the structural organising dynamics that underly them. It problematises the concealed diverse organising dynamics inherent in many aspects of coaching, whose effects are profoundly important. Critiques aimed at general conditions in coaching, for example that theory development lags practice 

Some examples  as resulting in a generalised "partialism" and drive towards "surfaces". What this means is discussed in more detail below, but in brief, partialism is the tendency towards emphasising the distinct, the part, the atom, the individual, the separate, the bounded etc. Partialism, as I use it here, does not denote an absolute category, but a tendency or proclivity towards the realism of discrete objects. 
The drive towards surfaces is likewise a tendency towards appearance and objectivity. When the world is viewed as partial - i.e. full of separate "things" - then those things, are can be taken at face value - i.e. by their appearance.
Together these drives have a tendency to quantise (that is - cut reality up into pieces - quanta) and quantify (that is - weigh, measure, etc. the quanta thus cut). In this view, the world *appears* to be populated by a vast plurality of different things of all different kinds, it becomes objectified - each object is separable, decomposable, amenable to analysis, measurement etc. This tendency is even found in many so called "holistic" approaches in which systems are emphasised over their constituent parts. In holistic views, relations and processes become more prominent and collectives are valued as such - sociology and ecology are examples - and while this can be a more capable view than atomism, it is still often subject to a subtle partialism. Under the influences described above, the world begins to look fragmented, set in opposition, power-driven and frequently incommensurable. While some perspectives attempt to address these issues, e.g. parts may be celebrated in the embrace of an all-inclusive pluralism. However, even in these cases, the embrace is inclusive only in principle, not in practice. Some parts remain stripped of value, substantial relationality or are denied, suppressed or excluded e.g. racism may be criticised and rejected for being partialist, oppressive and exclusionary. Racism explicitly privileges one group and excludes others, it is defined by its boundaries and severs the world into irreconcilable parts. However, the pluralist view, which aspires towards inclusion by its assertion that all perspectives are equally valid, typically rejects racism, criticising it as exclusionary, oppressive and partialist, and thus falls into the same partialist trap.

The issues then are not so much focussed on the "content" of a given "thing", say a theory, model, discourse or thought pattern, but the organisational dynamics, the structural architecture that underlies and produces them in the first place. Content therefore can be thought of as what an object consists of, and structure can be thought of as the habits of reality that bring it about.

Because of the fragmentation, produced by these underlying organising dynamics, the wholeness, or more generally - the metaphysical relationality - that inheres within all features of reality, is in some important sense covered over, or completely obscured. Again, it is not that difference, expressed in plurality is the issue - it is not - it is when difference and plurality are interpreted as bounded and separate, when differentiation becomes dissociation, that true relationality becomes severed and problems arise under descriptions such as "incompatible", "contradictory" or "incommensurable". When this happens, and it does so subtly, distinct parts, objects, "things" are seen to populate the world. In this view, the objects are known to be true, because within their defined boundaries they may be efficacious or replicable or whatever, thus their status as valid is reinforced, as is their status as object (or system). What is left unknown and with uncertain validity is how an object or system so validated can be true at the same time as another object or system equally validated, contradicts it. In other words, in a world populated by true objects, truth is interior to those objects as objects. Truth becomes as related to the object but isolated from the truth inherent in other objects. This gives rise to a kind of perspectivism in which one can take the intra-object view, observe the truth or validity, etc. to be found there and do the same in several other places, appreciate them all for their truths and come away without knowing how they relate to a whole beyond the limitations of their perspectives. Thus, a healthy pluralism, which is the expression in rich diversity of every aspect of nature is artificially confined to the parameters of a set of organisational dynamics that reliably produce the object of analysis. In the objectivist, partialistic view, truth beyond the object can't be reduced to the object or found outside of it in any systematic way, and so relationality becomes a mystery that is most commonly reduced to a kind of ontological link that shares many of the characteristics of objects. In all of these cases, relationality is either unseen or denied. 

When seen this way without a means of reintroducing true relationality, opposition arises between parts, resulting in partialism (a collection of incommensurable atoms beyond organic relationality) and strategies for rapprochement among the fragments are frustrated or made impossible. As a consequence, the ongoing developmental efforts in coaching mentioned above are based on strategies that are by their own nature insufficient to deal with a number of critiques at the heart of coaching, that rely on the presence of an underlying unity - such as the lag in the development of theory, research design and evidence of various kinds. 

While the issues to be discussed are variously represented in the coaching literature, quite well in many cases, explicit coherence in their apprehension, representation, interpretation, relationality and formulation in action, seems to be lacking at a disciplinary level. The consequences of this lack of explicit interior organisation or cohesion are several: It leaves the pluralisms of coaching fragmented into islands of value with little more than localised accessibility possible. Normative and systemic aspects of coaching as a discipline, such as it's maturation, ethics, standards, internal governance, and formalisation as a science among others, are hindered. Perhaps most fundamentally, it precludes a common philosophical grounding for the discipline.

It may seem that pluralism itself is being problematised, but this is not the case - what dynamically gives rise to the appearance of a dis-integrated partialism, is more closely what is being problematised. Beneath the appearance of the plurality are organising dynamics Coaching has a wonderful diversity to it, one that is a core enabler of the many faces and potentials of the discipline in praxis, a feature of coaching that is not criticised, it is the lack of epistemological unity at the heart of the diversity that is underdeveloped. The diversity in coaching, its pluralism, is a strength inasmuch as it enables almost endless combination, it is also a problem in coaching inasmuch as it disables generalisation, which constrains formalisation, which limits conceptualisation, which impacts on research, evidence, legitimacy and eventually, the quality of practice.   

As such,  appears I argue that this has to do not with the variety of ways in which issues are seen, but in how those varieties interrelate and their implications

and of their  aspects of their nature and interactions, e.g. their character, what they have in common, the assumptions and formative views that they engender, are frequently overlooked, ignored or remain unnoticed. Furthermore, for aspects of those issues that are acknowledged, I argue that their current conceptions and the consequent strategies for engaging with them are restricted by partialist apprehension and understanding, and could benefit from a more complete explication - the purpose of this chapter.




Discourses themselves are used as generalised containers for various multiplicities, and as lenses and modes of being and doing through which to examine coaching as a discipline in all of its facets (from governance to knowledge, research and practice etc.). In addition to addressing the multitudes within coaching, the same discourses provide similar access to the multiplicity of the environment external to coaching.

The approach to discourse analysis taken retains distinction in conceptual-analytical sense, but must go beyond them. The critical-analytical aspect . This is a feature of the approach that relies on the multiplicity of individual things and it seeks to identify, describe and analyse a range of issues related to them. In addition, the approach is also ultimately (re)constructive. This is a feature of the approach that is aimed at an overall advance of the way the issues to be discussed are seen, understood and engaged with. Thus the beginning and the end of the analysis both have an important place for things. However the critical-analytical and reconstructive aspects are not well-enough served by merely being allowed to range over the multitude of differentiated, static items that could be said to comprise coaching. By these, I mean the whole population of discrete "things" that could be said to make up coaching - everything from technical elements in personal practice, to overarching theory. To extend the reach of the analysis beyond the limitations inherent in the tendency towards this atomistic kind of view, I place the analytical (etc.) aspects into an overarching system of "difference as such" (chiefly following Deleuze and Luhmann #cite) to foreground the organising principles within those systems of difference.

Taking this approach has a range of implications, some of which are developed below, others are taken up in later chapters - phil, and impact. One example is the self-referential dynamic implicated in difference as such, the role of repetition, the "system as difference" conception and others. These implications will become central tenets in the thesis as a whole as they more easily recognise and admit process, relationality, emergence and other core features hidden (in plan sight) in the structures of coaching's discourses and literature. It is these deep features, present in coaching and its context, that this analysis seeks to engage with. These features, I believe, are widely misunderstood for several reasons, chief among which is the overreliance on a kind of objectivist default view of the world. The analysis pushes back on the dominance of the objectivist view only to rehabilitate it in a more proportionate and complete way.




Everywhere the differences between multiplicities and the differences within multiplicities replace schematic and crude oppositions. Instead of the enormous opposition between the one and the many, there is only the variety of multiplicity—in other words, difference.

For several reasons, I do not present or argue for specific definitions of coaching, the discourses considered, or attempt to determine fixed boundaries in general, in this analysis. This approach may appear to open itself to criticism or even be paradoxical (to not define the terms upon which the analysis relies), but there are a number of good reasons for taking it. The main reason is that, imposing definitions onto the complexities being considered in this analysis is too restrictive and subtly reintroduces problematic assumptions that this analysis attempts to point out. Definition or limitation is not denied or discarded as a category in this approach, it is reconstructed later, but is set as a background for the purposes of this analysis.

In contrast to the more conceptual, definition-dependent approach discussed above, the approach I will take instead considers "things" such as "coaching", "discourses" etc. as Deleuzian "multiplicities". For Deleuze, everything is a multiplicity, even an idea is a multiplicity (p. 239), and all multiplicities are predicated on "difference in itself" as fundamental. Deleuzian difference is substantive - i.e. it is real, ontologically prior, and the true energy or drive behind reality. Differentiated objects (determinations) are therefore consequences of difference (and repetition), they do not instantiate it. Multiplicities in this conception seem to me to provide the versatility needed to support the overlaps and interpenetrative nature of the scope considered in the analysis, as they replace neither the one or the many, but are "an organisation belonging to the many as such, which has no need whatsoever of unity in order to form a system." p. 235. This systemic organisation is far more accurately descriptive of the way that I will present the contents of this analysis. There may be the appearance of a unifying whole - the discourse of modernity, for example - but this appearance and the unity it tends to imply are not necessary for it to be the system that it is. In this way, an issue of interest in this analysis is brought to the fore - that of processual dynamism - in contrast to an otherwise overbearing orientation towards "things". More on this below.

Treating objects, which are "concepts of the understanding which make up the overly loose mesh of a distorted dialectic which proceeds by opposition." p. 235, as multiplicities in this way, removes limitations like isolation and opposition that are imposed by working with determinations (or definitions), and goes a long way to relieving the "distortions" in how they are seen. This "distorted dialectic", another of the main "issues" I seek to highlight in this analysis, points to structural gaps in representation, knowledge and understanding. It is partly through the discussion of these gaps, as they are reflected in the literature, that I will seek to illuminate other underlying or hidden issues in our discourses and practice. To supplement the indeterminacy of multiplicities, or perhaps to more fully align them as complementary with the discourse approach, I take Luhmann's notion of "system as difference". Whereas for Deleuze, difference as such, expressed in multiplicities has no obvious (or even specifiable) boundary condition, complicating its use in analytics, Luhmann, based on the same primacy of difference, holds that multiplicities are systems. Thus, coaching

Strong synergies are evident between Deleuze and the sociology of Luhmann, for whom "a system *is* difference - the difference between system and environment." [@luhmannSystemDifference2006] p. 38. For Deleuze, the multiplicity is a fundamental, everything is multiplicity, multiplicity is the true substance



While an Aristotelian object-ontological view takes distinction (definition etc.) as the real boundary of an object, for Deleuze everything - the one and the many - are a multiplicity.    "difference as such", or "difference in itself". The fullness of what this means is developed later, but it is a position held, with some variety by process theorists such as Whitehead, Rescher and Deleuze, sociologists such as Luhmann, biologists such as Maturana and Varela and hosts of others.

and whatever is differentiated is a "system" in Luhmann's view, one in which it is the difference that does the differentiating, not the system itself. This view permits a more fluid approach to content, boundary and communication, not restricted to the conceptual rigidity of static relata-relation ontologies but processual-relational ones that generate objects. A potential critique of this view is the possibility of excessive vagueness, a feature of the approach that will receive care and be developed below.
In short the approach to named entities is via difference itself, not objects or their inherent properties. Objectivity itself, while backgrounded for now, is restored to its central role later in the thesis - phil and concept chapters esp. The reason for making this choice is that to define coaching as a whole, or any of the discourses in their entirety is both impossible and undesirable, and that it is not their objectivity that holds the key to their understanding, but their differences.


Differentiation in a discourse predisposed to atomism, such as scientific materialism for example, holds tight definitions, precision measurements and exhaustive reduction to theory as the gold standard of knowledge - i.e. a commitment to the world as objects in relationship, governed by universal laws, predictable, deterministic and certain. This approach is too constraining for the goals of this analysis, which seeks, among other things, to subject the processes that produce such atomistic views, widespread in coaching to critique. 
Instead, in contrast with this longstanding objectivist orientation (since Aristotle, according to Rescher [@rescherProcessMetaphysicsIntroduction1996]), which is a commitment to ontological categories, I substitute Deleuze's "multiplicities" and 

>“Multiplicity”, which replaces the one no less than the multiple, is the true substantive, substance itself.
Deleuze P. 240

Thus differentiation is recovered and re-admitted, but it is not allowed to be made ultimate or final - difference itself is decisive in this chapter as with Luhmann and Deleuze. 





### Scope
The scope of the analysis is wide and inclusive, it covers the wide variety of coaching practice, the multitude of coaching contexts, and the philosophies, theories and technics associated with them etc. While the coaching discipline as a whole is the primary system of focus for this analysis, to make this analysis possible, the scope must also range over the full spectrum of systems that are substantially exterior to coaching. Global worldviews such as modernism that heavily influence coaching and the schools of psychotherapy from which coaching theory is drawn, are examples of important, but "exterior" systems to coaching. The logic for the scale of the scope is simply, that to differentiate coaching as a some-thing, something must be said about what it is not, i.e. things in other systems that are differentiated by difference and linked by communication. This point necessitates the inclusion of other-things, things beyond the difference that coaching is, such that coaching can be known by them.

Any differentiation made accrues meaning in terms of object, context, perspective and so on, but is not, and can not be, an ultimate distinction. Therefore, all items of the scope are treated as interrelated, and while differentiable, are in no way isolable, either within or beyond coaching. In this view, coaching consists of, and exists within, a radical entanglement of difference and influence. The multidisciplinary, multidimensional and multilayered nature of coaching means that, at the level of the discipline, the potential for an extraordinary range of diversity in expression is possible - e.g. what coaching is in a given conversation, would depend on a great many factors, and likewise, different instances of coaching conversations can vary widely.

An analysis of such scope, and which ranges across such variability, needs to begin from somewhere. In a scope such as this one, any starting point is ironically, merely a set of primary assumptions taken from the same multitude that the analysis seeks to address. There is no place from which we can escape our own constraints, systems of knowledge, history or subject matter etc. and in this case, there is no externality provided by the perspectives from which I will attempt the analysis - these are already within its purview. As such, I will approach the analysis, as nearly as I am able, following Rorty's [@rortyContingencyIronySolidarity1989] definition of an "Ironist" see. P.73. For Rorty, an ironist is someone who maintains a healthy scepticism about their own conceptual, linguistic and analytical frameworks, acknowledges the limitations of their chosen methods to resolve fundamental uncertainties, and remains humble about their perspective being just one of many valid ways to understand reality.

The way that I propose to understand reality in this analysis is through the lens of several prominent "discourses" that are influential in coaching and beyond. As above, debates are inevitable regarding what is in an out of scope of a given discourse, its meaning or perspective etc. even when considering what discourse itself is. Compare Foucault's [@foucaultArchaeologyKnowledge2002]  [@foucaultOrdersDiscourse1971] critical, power-centred, structural-historical approach to rationality and truth compared to say Habermas' [@habermasTheoryCommunicativeAction2007a]  [@habermasCommunicationEvolutionSociety2015]  normative, rational-consensus, interpersonal-dialogical approach to the same. For both, discourse is crucial, and they do share commonality, but they differ, sharply in some ways, about the topic itself.  

The ways in which the innumerable features and dynamics of coaching and the world, entangled and interpenetrative with each other as they are, appear in various composite forms within the coaching literature, are the focus of this analysis. Approaching the width and depth of the complexity of that entanglement and their composite forms in the literature is difficult to do. There is no neutral or exterior place to begin an approach. Any point of departure is arguably as good as another, and are thus somewhat arbitrary. As a consequence, every starting point, like every perspective, must commit to a set of initial assumptions in order to make a beginning. To set out these initial terms then, characterises and legitimises the approach taken, in full knowledge that it is but one view of many possibilities and that there is no position from beyond context, language, concept, history or genealogy from which pure or privileged access is possible [@rortyContingencyIronySolidarity1989] (Bhaskar, Deleuze etc.).

The approach taken in this chapter is to view a wide scope of relevant literature in general, and coaching literature in particular, organised by and accessed through the lens of discourse analysis. In other words, a given discourse acts as an organising system, drawing in literature within coaching and beyond, while simultaneously being the object of analysis.

Of the several discursive analytical methodologies available - Critical Discourse Analysis, Conversational Analysis and others - I approach this chapter guided by Foucauldian [@foucaultArchaeologyKnowledge2002] analytical concepts and principles - object and subject formation, strategy, discursive formations and so on. While aspects of some specialist varieties of discourse analysis are relevant, and included where necessary - multimodal discourse analysis, for example - these are enfolded in my use of the overall framework of Foucauldian Discourse Analysis (FDA) as either an extension, or a generalisation. Doing this provides a relatively lean methodological structure while providing access to the broad reach required by the scope (encompassing a broad range of literature sources and types) and depth (encompassing presuppositions, inherent structure, rules and process dynamics) that the analysis will consider. The combination of these analytical methods and scope provide access to 'diagnose' the present discursive dynamics in coaching in terms of their historical -  archaeological and genealogical - and systemic nature. For Foucault (1972), discourse is an almost living system of rules and statements, history and presence, specifics, generalities and contexts that both construct and constrain the world, our knowledge, shaping what can be thought, said, and done. 

Coaching is profoundly influenced by a range of discourses [@westernCoachingMentoringCritical2012] [@grayCriticalIntroductionCoaching2016]  etc. and they are engaged with in different ways. Internal discourses, that is, discourses already present within the discipline of coaching receive focus e.g. the discourses identified and discussed by Western and Gray et al. Another way that the presence of discourse is recognised and engaged in coaching, is with reference to their more global aspects that extend beyond the boundaries of coaching, such as in Bachkirova and others.
In either case, whether discussed within, or extending beyond the boundaries of coaching, the effects and implications of the variety of discourse are of undeniable importance across the whole of coaching.

This chapter considers how coaching is embedded in and interactive with, multiple discourses. It considers not only the content and character of the discourses but their rules, "discursive formations" [@foucaultArchaeologyKnowledge2002] and roles in coaching as a discipline. 5 discourses are selected as "dominant discourses", which are those that act like a centre of gravity in a collective, such that they have an almost executive function in the group or culture - a Foucauldian "authority". The discourses selected for analysis are modernism (classical and neoliberalism), postmodernism (and poststructuralism), systemic, processual and pragmatic discourses. Each of the discourses is located in the literature and their effects on coaching and beyond are considered.

As above, there are many ways to approach such an analysis, Foucauldian Discourse Analysis (FDA)  [@khanFoucauldianDiscourseAnalysis2021] has been selected for two main reasons. Firstly, other methods such as Critical Discourse Analysis (CDA), while valuable, begin from a starting-point already beyond that which I wish to achieve in this analysis (e.g. an established critique) and typically consider only a few items of limited scope [@machinHowCriticalDiscourse2012]. However, the chief focus of CDA - emancipation - is a central theme to which the thesis returns in later chapters (Phil & Impact). Secondly, FDA is more concerned with social than individual legitimacy (though the latter is recovered later - Impact Ch), and it leans towards retaining a view of structure that I wish to rescue from essentialism and rehabilitate to some degree later in the chapter [@khanFoucauldianDiscourseAnalysis2021]. 

The fact that FDA has a systematic aspect is shared with other approaches, however the systematic nature of FDA seems to me more scale invariant, i.e. it applies across a range of scales from the conversational to the paradigmatic, which other approaches, such as CDA or conversation analysis, do not. A feature which is important to this thesis.
I take "micro-level" (if they can be called that) discourse analysis to be associated with the thematic aspects of actual coaching occasions - i.e. already interpreted and integrated into coaching practice and literature. Thematic, or family resemblances in these discourses permit their categorisation and characterisation within coaching, for example, as Western and [@mulvieValueExecutiveCoaching2015] have done.
"Macro-level" discourse, though it will always be represented in the micro, extends beyond the micro to sources and influences that exist well beyond the bounds of coaching. Modernist discourses of various kinds pervade coaching for example, but they have origins and influences that predate and extend beyond the influence of coaching.
The institutional aspect of the analysis might be termed "meso-level" but I think this is inadequate as it it a present feature in every occasion, although it can be considered on its own terms. In all cases these three aspects are acknowledged to be present and involved.


Finally, discourse is not a 
discourse Inasmuch as discourse is systematic, it exerts an organisational energy over the various dynamics that constitute it, and as such, provides a convenient kind of 'conceptual container' within which the complexity of reality can be viewed.


- systems of thoughts, ideas, and practices that shape our understanding of the world. 

Discourse, in its fullest sense, represents more than a mere acknowledgement or description of the surface appearance of the content of exchange in communication; it encompasses the entire system of nature, thought, language, context and practice that shapes how we understand and engage with reality. It is in this fuller sense that I approach discourse in this analysis. I treat it as a 'natural' phenomenon, where 'nature' is the fullness of reality in all of its aspects and expressions, without exclusion. Discourse is therefore a natural production. While discourse is not localised to the human experience, it is at the human level at which it is a named something, appearing in reality, of which we can become aware, even as we are immersed and participative in it. This is a discourse about discourse.

Following Foucault (1972), discourse can be understood as a system of rules and statements in which we are complicit and in which there is an almost live, systemic mutuality that is co-constructive of our understanding of the world, while simultaneously constraining what is possible, what can be thought, said, and done within that understanding. In the context of coaching, these discourses Are not things that we can consider ourselves outside of, or objective to us, but that the multiplicity multidimensional multiplicity that coaching is of knowledge of people of systems etc, fundamentally shapes every aspect of the discipline from how we conceptualise human development and define effective practice to evaluating outcomes.

This analysis examines five prominent discourses that significantly influence the coaching discipline: modernist, postmodernist, pragmatic, systemic, and processual. Each discourse operates at multiple levels, from surface manifestations in language and practice to deep metaphysical assumptions about reality and knowledge.

A number of prominent, and frequently competitive discourses influence coaching as a discipline. 


There approach and purposes in the discourse analysis of coaching. To survey the coaching literature to detect the presence of influential discourses. Once identified, to The content of the discourse - it's specific claims, presuppositions and perspectives - are one aspect considered, the other is the nature of discourse itself and the interplay between the variety of them. Thus
One of the broad purposes is to highlight the presence nature and interactions of dominant discourses that literally shape and reproduce the discipline of coaching as a whole, its internal dynamics, its presentation and nature in practice, education and research as well as the effects and implications they have across all areas of coaching. 
The values and nature of coaching itself, oriented towards realising positive change for clients in particular, but the world more generally by extension, are in some important senses, frustrated by the containment that dominant discourse imposes on the natural dialogics of coaching. 

The analysis does not emphasise the content of literature from which the dominant discourses to be discussed are inferred, but rather, as Foucault [@foucaultArchaeologyKnowledge2002] might phrase it, is concerned with the "discursive formations" coincident with the discourses.
What this means is explored below in some detail.

One of these effects is who, what, and how the coach is and what they do, the almost “meta-scientific” nature of participation in a co-constructive, mutually dialogical conscious process. The idea of directionality in coaching, an implicit inter-discourse characteristic, in which something is somehow done to something else in the anticipation of some causal effect. e.g. what can I, the coach, do (implication - to the client) so that their determined circumstance A is moved towards a better circumstance B. Even if this is couched in the terms of consent, mutuality and co-creative participative action, the idea of directionality still retains a place in assumption. For example, coaching still hears the term "intervention”, as if some coaching action has a medicinal or mechanistic effect on some pre-given, assumed to be known, and already evaluated to be unsatisfactory, circumstance, such that a positive outcome is expected or approached in which an adjusting action or some kind of medical medical antibiotic is administered in the pursuit of some knowable outcome.

The process of coaching, I will argue, is an inherently moral action in that it intrinsically involves the creation, destruction and reordering of perception, fact, value, relation, experience, the world and broader contexts. The moral action of coaching arguably has, as its central power, freedom from mechanistic or medical determinism - which are corelation effects of different sorts. Known patterns and interactions of patterns are what constitute the sciences, from the most simple, contextually isolated physical systems to the most complex open systems. What belongs to established science are those stable habits of nature that have been adequately registered and modelled in some respect, conceptually represented and organised into theory. From the procession of an electron (small g) to repetitive patterns of thought, "complexes" for example, in psychology. A habit of nature is recognised, that is to say - registered, apprehended, noticed etc. - the features of its habitual appearance are noted and modelled, conceptualised and then theorised. Discourses are stable habits of representation, speech, action and belief that cut across various natural domains, such as reality itself, culture, nature, identity, change, structure, power and so forth.    
In many coaching situations it is the interruption of persistent, deterministic habits or patterns of behaviour, stable norms in organisations and so forth, that coaching is recruited to help evolve. It is not to replace one determinism with another although this could be temporarily desirable but the ultimate moral action of emancipation from restrictive determinism of any sort. It is this latter ultimate value to which coaching as a practice is oriented.

## Complexity 
Deleuze [@deleuzeDifferenceRepetition1994] would call this a "multiplicity" and for him, multiplicities, or "difference" as such, is the nature of reality. 

For Deleuze, multiplicities are not the complexity of the world, but its simplicity, not its appearance, but its very nature. Complexity of the conceptual kind, in this view, is an artificial or "distorted" appearance that results from mistaking the nature of difference for an indefinite pluralism characterised by relata, relation, concept and boundary. Instead of the object-relation in the rationalised conceptualised view, Deleuze and Guattari  argue for the rhizomatic nature of difference as a correction against what they call "pseudomultiplicities" [@deleuzeThousandPlateausCapitalism1987] p. 28. 






Difference itself, an axiomatic fundamental in this system, is one in which not things, nor relations, nor processes, but the multiplicity itself "is the true substantive, substance itself." p. 240. Until difference is substantive -i.e. that which underlies object and relation, it 

Principle of multiplicity: it is only when the multiple is effectively treated as a substantive, "multiplicity," that it ceases to have any relation to the One as subject or object, natural or spiritual reality, image and world.

Instead, by the principles of connection and heterogeneity "any point of a rhizome can be connected to anything other, and must be." [@deleuzeThousandPlateausCapitalism1987] p.28 exposes categorical perspectives 

model 
, 
From the view of difference as Deleuze would have it, organisation is "rhizomatic", not categorical

## Discussion
The "vicious abstractionism" that William James speaks about as being "one of the greatest original sins of the rationalistic mind"  is something that I wish to emphasise. Systematic abstraction of this kind, whatever its source, whether in the materialism of modernity, or the atomism of constructionism, or the commodification and commoditisation of the world - what is cause and what is effect is too complex a history to contemplate and one which is unlikely to give the possibility of redress. This is a reductionism to the abstract that destroys or denies the multiplicity of the occasion.

### Limitations and nature of discussion
Language is symbolic (it refers) and semiotic (it's interpretive), and constrains discussions like this to the mediation of intermediate conceptual and other differentiations, connections and so on (e.g. objects, relationships and meanings), which can (and must) be made, in order for meaning to be communicated, even if the referent of some system of semiotics is not a definable conceptual or ontological object at all e.g. the differentiation between the discipline of "coaching as a whole", "psychotherapy as a whole" or either of these and "philosophical realism as a whole" all three of which are also differentiated from an whole blue whale. 

### Difference as such
The analysis contends with what Deleuze would call "[multiplicities](Deleuze-Difference%20and%20Repetition.md#^ref-50163)". For Deleuze, multiplicities are given "utmost importance" and must "not designate a combination of the many and the one, but rather an organisation belonging to the many as such, which has no need whatsoever of unity in order to form a system." p. 239
For Deleuze, and likewise in this analysis, the multiplicities at all levels - coaching, discourse, etc. are treated this way, not as ontological verities, but as these multiplicities. One of the objectives of the analysis is precisely to move thought away from an over commitment to "things" in general, including how things participate in systems. Deleuze again - "The one and the many are concepts of the understanding which make up the overly loose mesh of a distorted dialectic which proceeds by opposition. The biggest fish pass through." I do not want to let these fish pass through.
### What the new system will need to be able to do:

1. Handle the **individual** coach, their education, their initiation into practice and their development [self](A%20call%20for%20clarity%20and%20pragmatism%20in%20coach%20education%202023.md#^EQ9KBI5UaPV8TKQXWp6) and [instrument](A%20call%20for%20clarity%20and%20pragmatism%20in%20coach%20education%202023.md#^QBALMFXUaPV8TKQXWp3) - it is after all how coaching comes into the world, and my view is that a coach is a channel for flow, not a repository for tools. This needs to be done in alignment with the discipline - Coaching cannot #abdicate responsibility to its practitioners
2. Handle [complexity](A%20call%20for%20clarity%20and%20pragmatism%20in%20coach%20education%202023.md#^8PZN32JFaPV8TKQXWp4), need to be able to handle multi-theoretical approaches [cohesion](A%20call%20for%20clarity%20and%20pragmatism%20in%20coach%20education%202023.md#^KWHSH2NAaPV8TKQXWp5), [multi-dimensional](Old%20Wine%20in%20New%20Bottles_%20Exploring%20Pragmatism%20as%20a%20Philosophical%20Framework%20for%20the%20Discipline%20of%20.md#^NGAGJYQVaNWI4QKW9p14)
3. Handle [context](A%20call%20for%20clarity%20and%20pragmatism%20in%20coach%20education%202023.md#^C7TKTVGUaPV8TKQXWp6) and [again](A%20call%20for%20clarity%20and%20pragmatism%20in%20coach%20education%202023.md#^8PZN32JFaPV8TKQXWp4), 
4. Handle client diversity - how to handle any situation
5. Handle how coaching [process and adaptation](A%20call%20for%20clarity%20and%20pragmatism%20in%20coach%20education%202023.md#^IPMKNZZPaPV8TKQXWp6) 
6. Handle [reflexivity in the coach](A%20call%20for%20clarity%20and%20pragmatism%20in%20coach%20education%202023.md#^66N3IBQVaPV8TKQXWp3) and in the [client](A%20call%20for%20clarity%20and%20pragmatism%20in%20coach%20education%202023.md#^UF2GR4KTaPV8TKQXWp4) - there's more in this article
7. Handle relationality - it's ok that pragmatism bridges the gap between knowledge and praxis, assuming a given level of self-awareness, but anyway, there is no way to bring into relation praxis across coaches, nor is it obvious how to research, develop etc. [problem](Old%20Wine%20in%20New%20Bottles_%20Exploring%20Pragmatism%20as%20a%20Philosophical%20Framework%20for%20the%20Discipline%20of%20.md#^9S5ICE5TaNWI4QKW9p15) 
# Footnotes

:  - in coaching [@coetzeeProblematisingCurrentCoaching2023]  [@stanciulescuCopingAdaptationSociology2024]  and beyond [@reevesTamingComplexity2020]. 
: 