# Dodo Bird Effect
Trying to account for the dodo bird effect might be done by acknowledging that people are integrated systems and that if change is attempted in one particular area, say behavioural interventions, then we should reasonably expect the change to propagate through into other dimensions for example the interior felt experience of a particular event. 

Something behavioural such as a breathing technique may reduce physical anxiety, reduce an elevated heart rate, lower stress hormones etc. and therefore produce a calmer mind. The same set of outcomes might be attempted by encouraging the clients to notice the feelings in a detached and meditative way, slow down the runaway mind and thereby introduce calm to the compound human, beginning with the mind and propagating into the body an environment thereby attaining the same results, but from a different starting point. A third approach might be to evaluate the meaning that a client makes from a given situation, where their interpretation of events results in feelings of anxiety. If a change in mental processes can be achieved, then when faced with the event that would ordinarily trigger anxiety, the client makes different sense from the occasion and doesn't get bothered in the first place. 

The point of an integrated intervention would be to have multiple angles of attack. For example we might suggest breathing, meditation, finding a peaceful and tranquil environment to spend a few minutes, body work or exercise, talking to a trusted 3rd party who can calm the person down and so on. But taking a multi pronged approach it's worth speculating that the outcomes could be better, the client receives several different strategies from the coach and can practice them according to their own preferences. The client might for example think that meditation is rubbish and so strategy based on that behaviour is unlikely to produce the results required, but if they have the choice of employing their breathing as a gateway to the same outcomes, at least they have more choice in the matter.The above solution details a palliative or symptomatic intervention, but curative interventions such as the meaning making of the client might be employed as the core strategy to which the symptomatic relief interventions are scaffolding.

The context should make it obvious which strategies the client tends more towards and which ones are probably more beneficial in employing.




# Tags
#dodobird #integral_approach #outcomes 

# Links
[[Coaching has an identity problem|Coaching has an identity problem-]] Coaching has an identity problem-Part of the problem is sorting out why effects or outcomes are similar no matter what tradition the therapist or coach uses
[[Axi-20200310154520|Axi-]] Axi- The axial belief here is that humans are integrated or compound individuals and an effect in one area will have effects in all areas.
[[Techniques-20200423131929|Techniques-]] Techniques-The coach should be able to employ techniques that cater to the various dimensions of a client and integrate them into an overall intervention


# Refs
@bachkirovaDevelopingApplyingNew2015
There are lots of others in the ref manager