Note: **This section needs to be re-written with the GPT conversations and thought given to how it will integrate with other features.** [Objections to Emergence](Objections%20to%20Emergence.md)


Emergence is the thing that you get from the formation of higher order holons. This means that there's stuff you can't predict from the ingredients and it also means that emergent properties aren't explainable and are therefore lost in analysis at any given level. If this is lost, then what is lost is everything that was novel, significant, meaningful and valuable. 
Something is as it is, comprised of it's parts, within it's context and with it's history, but the moment it is analysed, the thing itself is no longer what it was, because the emergent aspect has been lost.
I wonder if emergence as a cure is a viable strategy for coaching or treatment. Like if there's an issue "a" then to fix it, we combine it into a larger holon, or show it's contribution to one, invite one to be grown into, then maybe the emergence at that new, higher level will be sufficient to recontextualise it such that it is no longer an issue.

If you tweak a part, it will result in new emergence. Maybe tweak parts until a better, or desired emergence is sufficiently good that the issue is resolved. Or add new ones at the sub level, to see changes at the super level.

**2022-07-22 10:20**
Read @[(Mark H. Bickhard), 2003] in @[(Johanna Seibt), 2004] for some brilliant stuff on emergence. Deals with some critiques and argues for the validity of process ontology. Def needs to go into the PhD

**02/12/21**
Synchronicity is evident in many natural phenomena that don't even need to be alive. From the subatomic scale to the whole galaxy and in biological systems, too. Complex behaviour can be produced by simple rules and repetition. [The Secret of Synchronization](The%20Secret%20of%20Synchronization.md) [Steven Strogatz How things in nature tend to sync up](Steven%20Strogatz%20How%20things%20in%20nature%20tend%20to%20sync%20up.md) are examples as is the thing about survival in bats.
Now, I am thinking if we are talking about integrated systems - for example an organism like a person, how might this influence out thinking - what is the rhythm of our being and becoming, what would happen if we changed something for long enough for it to simply emerge as a new pattern of ... whatever?
As a culture, if you're designing what you want a company or team to do, then what are the "rules" you'd want to place your bets on and then you don't look at outcomes as evidence of what happens, what happens is what happens - you look at the people and the rules and maybe the environment as well. If you think, like ... and I can see myself writing this... Paul Lawrence, and claim that these things don't exist, then it's naieve to think that there aren't cadence, and other characteristics that aren't creating what's going on. Then what perspective taking allows is for larger people to fiddle with the underlying bits, make sure that focus remains on the few simple rules and then look for the emergence.

**18/03/2020**
Notes while reading SES - maybe emergence is the moment by moment, lived unfolding of the process of evolution itself. And in replaying it over and over a billion trillion times, each wave (life) has the potential to take one step further than the others and thus cut a path into the Kosmos.
Culture is the code keeper of the unfolding, a repository or master library if you will, one in which a new reader enters at the front door and sets about learning, coding themselves, allowing themselves to be coded by their ancestors and then writing code for those to whom they will be ancestors.

**23/03/2020**
Does emergence present a #repeating a "growth #pattern" or execute a personal (?) Kosmic path when anything changes. That is to say, over the aeons, things have developed in a certain way, those are played over in a lifetime as a reflection of some sort of the Kosmic pattern of habits, then, can it also be said that within a given change experience that an even finer representation of that overall pattern can be seen? So when encountering a new thing as an individual, a first we take in a set of limiting contours, then along each of those, with progressive passes, gradually form higher-resolution grooves, or pathways / patterns / habits that can be followed to a particular goal in a particular context. Might be some evidence in the #novice-to-expert literature.

Metaphor could be the tapping of a thread - wherein raw material is first cut by a leading, typically loose fitting and comparatively blunt, broad edge, gradually showing more and more resemblance to the final shape, with grades of resolution being added with each progressive pass, until the final product is achieved. Shallow, broad cuts are first made, then, deeper, more precise etc.

In the developmental literature, what are the core characteristics of each of the stages? For example, where would Stages learning styles fit into the framework of formal operations? What is passive individual about it? active individual, passive collective and so on? What of those, (or other) characteristics are found in the the #novice-to-expert literature, change #process literature and so on? e.g. in the TTM of change, are any of these characteristics inherent? Is there an order to them? Do they have a recurrence of some sort? What is the energy, frequency and vibration that describes them? What octaves up and down are there? Lift the tone, double the frequency or the thickness of the string. 

Side bar, resonance between the aspects of the self probably need to be in harmony. So that video od 

**02/06/20** - **this bit might need to move to it's own section**
Inconsistencies and contradictions might be usefully seen in terms of the ordinal hierarchy of things. For example it might be that at a given ordinal level and inconsistency reveals a lack of breath, but it might also be that a sufficiently broad ordinal might be producing emergent factors which are higher level influences producing inconsistencies at a sub- ordinal (in terms of the emergent property it is sub- ordinal) level. It might be that any influence which can be considered to produce and inconsistency or contradiction can be analysed, or understood in terms of its own emergence. For example it might be accounted for by understanding when the causal factors involved in the production of the contradiction emerged. Did they emerge at the ordinal level? And if so we are probably talking about an issue of breadth, of skill, of coverage and completeness, perhaps even of developmental surface area. If a relatively complete, or well populated developmental surface is producing emergent factors which are not yet conceivable as a higher order, emergent holon, then it is perhaps useful to consider the contradiction as being a product of the developmental processes involved in the now sub- ordinal system. Another way of saying this might be that a given system though complete will remain imperfect because no system is eternally well adapted to the world. So even well-adjusted systems are going to produce emergent properties which have better ways of recognising, registering and handling the world then do the systems from whence they were generated. The diagnosis then is to which level of emergence the causal factors of an inconsistency or contradiction have emerged. Did they emerge from one level or another?

It will be difficult to differentiate between the origin of the inconsistencies because, even in skill building for example there is a contribution outwards on the horizontal plane which is also not different from a contribution upwards on the vertical plane even though the horizontal plane is more or less determinable and the vertical plane is not. Education for example runs according to a particular prescription and seems to generate repeatable enough results in terms of knowledge acquired, but not in terms of altitude acquired.

**11/06/2020**
Above I was talking about the repeating pattern of emergence. It seems that the oscillation between an individually focused orientation, or level of development and a collective focused orientation, or level of development seems to be pointed to by systems like spiral dynamics and the stage descriptions of other theorists like Keegan. 

When reading the stage descriptions and systems that don't explicitly state or postulate an individual – collective spiral, one gets the sense that a particular quadratic perspective  is being favoured or emphasised, for example the post-modern stages of development seem to emphasise the lower left quadrant, that is the cultural aspect or perspective, it is where they say, the world is created, truth resides among other things. Whereas the orange level of development seems to emphasise the individualistic, agentic aspects or perspectives. So it seems then that it is not implausible to postulate a swing between identity and community in the developmental process. But if we compare this to what we find in the integral four quadrants what seems to be missing is an oscillation between the interior and exterior, that is to say, for the individual and collective oscillation that has been suggested by several theorists either explicitly or implicitly, that there is a simultaneous interior - exterior process going on. 

It may be the case that what Terri O'Fallon has suggested in her stages model is to say that there is indeed an oscillation between the interior and exterior, and as with the stage models that suggest a individual and collective oscillation that moves stages on it seems just as plausible to suggest that they might be a movement within the stage development process that emphasises interior and exterior movement. If we superimpose these two oscillations onto the four quadrants, what we seem to get is not a spiral, but an infinity symbol spiralling upwards. Stages postulates that the first encounter with a new developmental level is to be "passive", this they characterise as being a zone one and zone three stage, but I would suggest it is merely the upper left quadrant that is being foregrounded or emphasised. Obviously all quadrants all always operating all the time it is not a question that one of them develops first but merely that one attracts the focus of attention at a given moment in the dialectic of development. Passivity implies an incoming orientation of experience that is the experience of new data coming into the individual from the outside, largely uninformed and chaotic but accumulating and awareness is at work sorting through the incoming information. At some point the individual begins to recognise patterns in the incoming data and may start to experiment behaviourally in the world with this information. According to stages this would then be the "active" phase of development (still with the individual aspect in focus). Once the individual has the experience organised on their interior, and has an amount of experience of using this material behaviourally in the world they then turned towards a collective orientation and begin to figure out with other people what new "we" space might look like. This represents an "incoming or passive" orientation towards now the collective aspect of development in which the individual subordinates their own agency to the collective. In the same manner information from the world is accumulating in the collective consciousness, becoming organised, categories being formed and so on. At some point this building collective awareness is projected outwards into society and the world at large as a collective endeavour and this represents the active portion of the collective stage of development.

In this way development is catered for, that is the upward trend towards increasing complexity, as well as the individual/collective pattern in the dialectic of development but also includes the dialectic that is involved with the interior and exterior pendulum swing of development.

The pattern therefore begins in the upper left-hand quadrant with incoming information being organised, the orientation turns outward into the world as active experimentation begins in the upper right hand quadrant, these two represent the individual aspect of development. From here development turns towards the collective but at first is "passive", culture is being formed, mutual understanding is being built, collective values established and so on, and at some point the emphasis shifts from the establishment of this interior culture towards the building of an exterior civilisation, modes of production, technology and the collective aspect of the world at large. These represent the lower left and lower right hand quadrants respectively. The new cycle of development begins when the structures that have been developed in the lower right hand quadrant become inadequate to cater for the experience of the individual they will again turn inwards, the "passive, individual, upper left hand quadrant" moment of developmental dialectic begins again and so the pattern repeats.




# Tags
#axial/axi #emergence


# Links
[[Holons|A_Holons-]] A_Holons-
[[Patterns and holons|Patterns_and_holons-]] Patterns_and_holons-
[[Evolution - Devolution]]
[The Great Chain of Being](The%20Great%20Chain%20of%20Being.md)
[Emergentism - Wikipedia](Emergentism%20-%20Wikipedia.md)
[Emergentism notes](Emergentism%20notes.md)


# Refs
@[, 2017] (Plotinus)